<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>The Broken and the Lost</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="The Broken and the Lost" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="broken_and_lost" class="title">The Broken and the Lost</h1>

    <section title="Broken Technologies">
      <h2 id="broken_tech">Broken Technologies</h2>

      <p>
        The five Grand Wonderworks described in Sorcerously Advanced are not
        the only technologies created by long-lost civilizations. The
        four-billion-year history of the Basin provides vast numbers of such
        marvels. Unfortunately, most of them are badly broken.
      </p>
      <h3>Concordance Beacons [Statecraft]</h3>
      <p>
        On one continent, eleven glimmering beams of light pierce the skies.
        They are placed about fifty koss apart from one another, and each is
        visible for a hundred koss or more in every direction. By focusing on
        the beam, you may sense any other people who are likewise looking at
        one of the beacons and rapport with them (assuming they are willing).
        Unlike the normal peace of Rapport, the beacons’ flickering light
        causes headaches, and ephemeral winds scour the mind. What happens if
        one’s mind is caught in a beacon when it fails, no one knows.
      </p>
      <h3>Free Your Mind [Self]</h3>
      <p>
        On a mountainous continent toward the Hub exists a machine, buried
        deep below the earth. Its tendrils stretch throughout the land: veins
        of gold carrying carefully patterned pulses, in a cadence that
        resonates with the human mind. After a few days of exposure, the
        resonance reaches a peak and any mind-control effects are broken. The
        long-missing creators of this device would likely appreciate that
        their device is no longer necessary with the advent of the Gift.
        Nevertheless, the tendrils continue to slowly grow, stretching beyond
        the continent and beneath the sea.
      </p>
      <h3>The Ghost-Mind [Research]</h3>
      <p>
        Ghost-binding was once considered a valued art among the world’s
        necromancers. One nation’s magi bound a seething mass of ghosts in a
        web across their continent, calling them simultaneously to multiple
        summoning circles. They were stretched thin, able to hear what was
        said in one place and repeat it in another. They quivvered in response
        to death-flow and life-flow. Their mind was amalgamated, so they
        thought as one. So say the records. Once the souls of these ghosts
        moved to their next lives, the ghosts themselves became just tattered
        memories, whispering incoherently in the many circles to which they
        are still bound.
      </p>
      <h3>The Hedge [Tradecraft]</h3>
      <p>
        A long-dead nation wished to spy on its enemy, so their Earthpower
        adepts build a means to conceal people as they traveled. A
        quick-growing plant insinuated itself across thousands of miles,
        hiding near trees and in ravines. Those with a certain tattoo could
        enter and leave, and see out from within. Then those enemies turned
        the hedge around on itself, and everyone who entered was lost forever.
      </p>
      <h3>Jet Streams [Industry]</h3>
      <p>
        The upper atmosphere of the Basin is generally calm and unperturbed.
        One ancient culture thought it would be more useful if there were
        grand currents there, as there are in the seas. Presumably they would
        have used them to propel airships more quickly. Now there are only a
        few of these blisteringly fast corridors left. They wreak havoc on the
        weather patterns at their beginning and end, disrupting the flow and
        causing freak occurences like triangular hurricanes or standing
        lightning.
      </p>
      <h3>Potion-fruit Forest [Industry]</h3>
      <p>
        Potion-fruit trees are a standard trick for the Hearth-kin, a way to
        have nature work certain rituals for them as they take on other tasks.
        Long ago, someone seeded multiple continents with such trees. In the
        intervening milennia, those trees have hybridized with local flora.
        Some of the resulting plants bear delicious-tasting or delicately
        scented potions. Most, however, have gone awry, and bear fruits that
        are poisonous, acidic, cursed, or downright explosive.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section title="Lost Expressions">
      <h2 id="lost_arts">Lost Expressions</h2>
      <p>
        The spells of many Traditions are lost forever in the Basin’s billions
        of years of history. Those most easily recovered are from the Paths of
        Language or Geometry, simply because their recordings are more
        durable, but most Founts and Paths have ways of preserving records for
        the distant future.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most of the Expressions listed here are merely fragments of existing
        arts. Adding them to one’s repertoire would not require using up a
        Core Expression slot, assuming one already knew the related art.
      </p>
      <ol>
        <li>
          <strong>Acceleration</strong>, an expression of Industry that grants
          greater and greater speed. Found in geometrical diagrams traced into
          the wheels of an indestructible metallic wagon in a crater on a
          mountainside.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Accept the Offering</strong>, which purports to receive a
          soul from the Uncountable Spinners if one has a mystic connection to
          it. Found in a pattern of beads on a temple curtain.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Aggravation</strong>, which makes the caster so distracted
          and upset that they cannot focus well enough to act on certain
          expressions of Trickery. Pieced together from a broken tablet with a
          boot print upon it.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Air-gills</strong>, a spell designed for aquatic beings.
          Traded to the Archive by a traveler from another world.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>All The Way To The End Of Time</strong>, a dreamshaping
          expression that takes existing structures or landscape featuers and
          replicates them infinitely. Found in a Dream Realm composed of
          endless staircases.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Become the Heart</strong>, which shapeshifts you in to an
          immaterial manifestation of warm feeling of home. Discovered by
          rescuing its creator from the spell itself.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Beneath the Depths</strong>, a flawed art for underwater
          adaptation, discovered on the corpse of an deep-sea explorer
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Beyond the Grasp of Years</strong>, which coats an object in
          amber to preserve it for the future. Discovered in the patterns of
          buzzing from giant bees.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Bone Dagger</strong>, a Weaponry expression,
          reverse-engineered from a cache of examples.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Bridge of Escape</strong>, an attempt to access the Travel
          lattice but without being able to specify the destination. Found on
          a clay tablet falling through the Travel Lattice.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Bury the Evidence</strong>, which interrs prepared materials
          within the earth. Found inscribed on a cask deep within the Basin’s
          crust.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Busy Household</strong>, an illusion that makes it appear as
          if a house had multiple people inside and lights on. Found by the
          Unroyal in a distant land and turned over to the Archive.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Call the Dream</strong>, which overlays a Dream Realm onto
          the physical world. Found in a set of fallacious equations.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Call the Ghostly Iron</strong>, an Energy Wave variant that
          only works in regions with buried parallel lines of steel deposits.
          Found inscribed on a more-preserved stretch of those deposits.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Call to Aid</strong>, which sends up a flare visible and
          audible for many koss. Developed and lost by many a civilization
          long before the Gift.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Chime of Attention</strong>, which urges all those nearby to
          look at the caster or else directly away from them. Found in a
          bell-maker’s journal.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Chorus of Joy</strong>, which inspires those who hear it to
          have good cheer and attempt great deeds. Pieced together from a
          hundred hymnals.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Clear the Lens</strong>, a now-useless spell to improve a
          long-lost scrying technique. Found in the strange curvatures on a
          telescope lens.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Comprehend the Ailing Body</strong>, which diagnoses the
          root cause of physical illnesses. Found in the ruins of a hospital.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Consummate Understanding</strong>, which lets you come away
          from Rapport with temporary but complete understanding of what your
          Rapport partners knew. Found hidden in a calendrical scroll of love
          poems.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Conviction</strong>, which increases one’s resistance to
          persuasion by amplifying stubbornness. Heard in songs passed down
          from a long-dead culture.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Count the Stars</strong>, a set of mathematical techniques
          for Mental Acuity. Found by reading the patterns left on a
          three-dimensional abacus.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Crimson Massacre</strong>, a variant on
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#stutter_stepping">Stutter-stepping</a>
          that dips into the Red Space. Causes severely depleted flow, and
          thus doesn’t last very long. Found on the sash of a corpse in the
          Red Space.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Crown of Fire</strong>, a Terror expression that’s less
          “horror” and more “awe”. Discovered in a palace when the
          Worldbuilders called a city forward in time.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Cut the Circle</strong>, which strikes against magical
          patterns and diagrams in an attempt to disrupt spells on the path of
          Geometry. (Works as per normal conflict rules.) Found in Geometer
          territory and immediately confiscated by the Guild.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Damn the Path</strong>, a ritual which creates a curse that
          jumps from one user of a particular Tradition to another, burning
          out particular Expressions. Found at the apparent site of an
          interrupted ritual.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Darts of Ice</strong>, an Energy Wave variant, discovered in
          a desert crypt
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Devil’s Voice</strong>, a now-useless art of secution.
          Traded for a fragment of soul in a demon market.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Die</strong>, an instant-death curse. People in the modern
          age are well-defended against such things. The counter-curse is
          recorded in a historical text; the original was reverse-engineered
          from it.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Divide the Foe</strong>, which harmlessly splits an armed
          force into two smaller units. Found in scrimshaw on half of a
          skeleton.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Draw and Bind</strong>, a major ritual that opens a
          permanent portal to elsewhere in the Kaleidoscope. Found as a
          half-finished mosaic.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Draw the Flame Within</strong>, a Knotwork precursor that
          allows one to breathe in flames and thus store fire-flow. Deduced
          from the reagents in a long-lost storeroom.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Everlasting Youth</strong>, a spell of beauty and
          cosmetology, inscribed on the back of a mirror
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Extended Grasp</strong>, a variant of Telekinesis that gives
          less strength but full sense of touch. Reverse-engineered from a
          wand that casts the spell.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Extract Mortality</strong>, which turns its victim into a
          unique type of flow parasite. Found being traded in a soul market in
          the Worlds Beyond.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Faces of Horror</strong>, which intentionally clones artwork
          to disturbing effect (though not in game terms). Reverse-engineered
          from a Realm Beyond filled with such paintings.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Final Revenge</strong>, which turns the caster into a
          mindless beast of creeping fungus and deadly spores. Brought back in
          time by a Worldbuilder citizen.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Flow-repelling Shell</strong>, a failed attempt to create
          local Null Zones. Found in an impossibly old hut within a wild magic
          zone.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Focus the Lance of Oblivion</strong>, a now-useless spell
          that activates a long-destroyed magical superweapon. Found in the
          capitol of an overthrown ancient empire.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Fox of the Founts</strong>, which substitutes another Fount
          for your own at the cost of 1 Reserve. Found in a maelstrom of flow
          where it plunges underground.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Ghost Stories</strong>, a Psychometry technique that works
          best on murder scenes. Appears on the foreheads of thrice-killed
          ghosts on a forever-shadowed island.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Globular Phantasms</strong>, which its creator originally
          mistook for a mirage-inducing drug-like art, but which actually
          views the microscopic world. Found in with a large collection of
          drug magics.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Grant of Vitality</strong>, which enchants any living being
          with regenerative powers. Found in a half-sunken city from a bygone
          era.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Hammer-And-Anvil Hands</strong>, a Distillation expression.
          Part of an Arete manual found undamaged in an ancient forge.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Hear the Silence</strong>, a Sixth Sense variant that
          detects flow parasites at a distance. Found in a strongbox on a
          panaquin carried eternally by mindless wraiths.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Hear the World Spirits</strong>, a variant of Expanded
          Expertise that grants one specific type of Archetypal. Attested to
          in ancient tablets and recovered from the very spirits who first
          taught it.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Horn of Purity</strong>, a Healing expression that flushes
          poison from the system. Found in situ on the horns of many creatures
          near the Hub.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Hub and Home</strong>, a direction-finding spell that
          predates the Travel Lattice. Reverse-engineered from a Hub-seeking
          compass.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Infinite Viewpoints</strong>, a Curse/Hallucination hybrid.
          Found in patterns left by ley lines in a destroyed city.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Inner Purification</strong>, which uses trace aspects from
          inside one’s own body to purify swallowed material into suitable
          reagents. Found in the introductory tomes of a Blood Magic / Alchemy
          Tradition.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Joining of Minds</strong>, which creates an inextricable
          two-person group mind. Found as a holy rite in a long-lost temple to
          duality.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Know the Wild</strong>, which lets one hear whispers from
          nature spirits and survive the wilderness more effectively. Learned
          from a spirit of a swamp after a long slumber.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Labor No More</strong>, a minor ritual that creates a more
          capable mystic servitors that does the work with which you’re most
          familiar. Found incribed on a half-dozen run-down automata in a
          Dream Realm.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Leave the Ground</strong>, in which one leaps to space.
          Found inscribed on the 400 prayer beads of a rosary.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Lift the Sunken Lands</strong>, a Great-Work-level Ritual
          that draws continents up from beneath the ocean. Found on the
          highest mountaintop in the Guild’s homelands.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Locked into Thought</strong>, a curse that mentally traps
          one’s opponent in a game that they must win to escape. (Resisted
          with Mystery rather than Self.) Discovered in the positions of the
          far-separated pieces on a game board that spanned nations.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Make Way</strong>, which deconjures stone, dirt, and other
          examples of elemental earth. Found in a cave in the Sovereigns’
          territory.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Meteor Self</strong>, which turns the caster into a dense
          purple metal that can survive a fall from any height. Found
          inscribed on one of the Ten-Crore Stones.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Mirror World Continuance</strong>, a variant of immortality
          that allows one to live within a mirror and move to nearby ones.
          Taught by someone still alive inside of one of them.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>No More Pigeons</strong>, a Warding variant that kept a
          warlock’s palace cleaner. Found inscribed on that very same palace.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>No You</strong>, which uses a crude form of the Shell Game
          to reverse mind control spells. Found written in cyphered form in a
          sorceror’s timeworn notebook.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Open the Third Eye</strong>, an Enchantment expression that
          grants Second Sight. Found in Nova territory in a library that was
          previously thought picked clean.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Paean to Mayhem</strong>, used solely to generate Chaotic
          Flow side-effects. Discovered in the form of aspects preserved in a
          block of frozen time.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Perfect Silence</strong>, an expression of the Self for calm
          and meditation. Found in the ringing of a long-lost bell.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Plow</strong>, which plows fields, heard forever echoing
          from the mountains in a verdant valley
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Primordial Call</strong>, which brings up creatures of the
          sea to help one travel the oceans. Water-breathing not included.
          Discovered in the songs of cetaceans.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Puppet’s Poles</strong>, a mind-control spell (now useless),
          discovered in the ruins of a Fraternity of Truth headquarters
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Rain of Silver</strong>, a hail-like Weatherwork expression.
          Found in a scroll, locked in a case, locked in a ches, locked in a
          vault, encased in a block of solid quartz.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Reach Toward Divinity</strong>, a state-approved version of
          Becoming from a long-dead religion, found written in sapphire in a
          hell.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Remember Love</strong>, which allows one to relive moments
          of love and care. Found in one of Diadem’s vassal states where its
          practice had nearly been forgotten.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Rite of Cleansing</strong>, a ritual to re-aspect flow over
          a large area using the shared beliefs of those who live there.
          Reconstructed from twenty fragments found in a Null Zone.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Sacred Form</strong>, which shapeshifts the caster into a
          swan (which was holy to the culture that made the spell). Found on a
          stone relief in a city’s center.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Seek Magi</strong>, a once-useful spell that allowed one to
          feel changes in the flow from a great distance. Found inscribed in
          the floor of a temple.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Shared Souls</strong>, in which four consenting magi each
          end up with a quarter of each others’ souls, mixing their magic
          signatures. Found in three different spellbooks from the distant
          past.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Speak to the Square</strong>, which allows you to speak so
          that anyone in one specific ruined city square can hear you - from
          anywhere. Found in an ancient wizard’s pocket dimension before it
          collapsed.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Spider Feels the Web</strong>, a ritual which gives the
          caster a mystic connection to every house in a settlement, letting
          them use certain magics (like Farspeech) on those who live there.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Split the Sky</strong>, a defense against attacks from
          above. Found forced into the ground near a Ten-Crore Stones strike
          site.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Stolen Face</strong>, which makes you look like someone else
          (in more than just your literal face). Found hidden in the memoirs
          of a famous thief from a thousand years ago.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Strength of the Serpent</strong>, a blood magic spell that
          bestows power based on what animal’s blood you absorb. Found in the
          pattern of scales on an extinct snake.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Suspended Life</strong>, which kills the caster and
          resurrects them one day later. Found on a tablet in the previous
          homelands of Those Above.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Take the Burden of the Wounded</strong>, an Arete expression
          wherein the caster heals another by absorbing their wounds. Much
          faster than traditional Healing arts, though with an obvious
          drawback. Taught by instructors in a World Beyond that revolves
          around wisdom and sacrifice.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>The Climbing Seed</strong>, an example of Nature-work that
          only sprouts on solid stone and overgrows stone buildings. Observed
          in situ.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>The Fan of Journeys</strong>, not an object but a spell
          which whisks ships into the sky to sail there. Found abandoned in
          the Aliala, the Dream of Flying.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>The Forty-Four Assembled</strong>, which calls a specific
          variant of mystic defender. Found on the statues of those bygone
          warriors.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>The Right Play</strong>, apparently used by one wizard to
          cheat on others at cards. Found near the murder site.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>The Strategist’s Dream</strong>, a Hypnopraxis technique
          that permits the caster to replay battles or plan for future ones.
          Found inscribed on a sword preserved within a massive shard of
          amber.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>The Thousand Ton Curse</strong>, which leaves its victims
          unable to move under the weight. Found in mid-air, five koss up.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>The Tired-Eyes Curse</strong>, which is actually an art of
          the Shroud. Found already mixed and ready for use in an ancient
          cauldron.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Tide Knows Tide</strong>, which turns movements of the flow
          directly into mechanical motion (so as to create wind or speed
          travel). Written into a pattern of islands and read from their map.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>To The Horizon</strong>, yet another broken teleportation
          method. Found on a body in deep space.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Track the Soul</strong>, which allows you to track down
          someone if you have a piece of their soul. Found inscribed on the
          soul of a dragon that sleeps for a million years.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Unfailing Wellspring</strong>, an apparently
          inaccurately-named spell that calls up flow where there is none.
          Found in a wizard’s decrepit tower in a deep Null Zone.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Unstable Duplication</strong>, which makes copies that may
          or may not make copies of themselves. Found on a scroll next to a
          skeleton crushed beneath thousands of identical books.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>War’s End</strong>, a method for disconnection. Assembled
          from shards of ceramic disks scattered across a continent.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Waste of Time</strong>, a fish-summoning spell apparently
          not thought worth passing on by a magus who nevertheless recorded it
          for posterity in the Universal Repositories.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Water to Gold</strong>, because who keeps stacks of lead
          lying around, honestly? Found next to an extremely convincing statue
          of a human being.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Wave Crashes Last</strong>, which delays certain Energy Wave
          variants until they are released by the caster. Found in a
          silver-and-black book left near an ancient dueling circle.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Winged Messenger</strong>, which sends a conjured bird to
          deliver a message to someone. Found on the sacred wrappings of a
          mummy, beneath a step pyramid covered in bird skeletons.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Wings of Light</strong>, a spell of flight that is stronger
          during the day. Found in a prayer book.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Witness the Balance</strong>, an Infrastructure-level art
          that reveals the “balance” of a city according to a long-lost
          culture’s ideas of balance. Carved into the ceiling of a collapsed
          underground tunnel.
        </li>
      </ol>

      <aside>
        <h3>When is it a new Expression?</h3>
        <p>When it does something different, or shifts to a new Nature.</p>
      </aside>
    </section>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
