<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>Mystical Infrastructure</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Mystical Infrastructure" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="mystical_infrastructure">Mystical Infrastructure</h1>
    <h2 id="list_by_nature">List by Nature</h2>

    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Industry:</strong> <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#dream_factories">Dream Factories</a>, <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#flow_dynamics">Flow Dynamics</a>,
        <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#gracious_attendants">the Gracious Attendants in Miniature</a>, <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#raise_strata">Raise from the Strata</a>
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Research:</strong> <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#generative_zones">Generative Zones</a>,
        <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#mosaics">Gyre-Fusing Mosaics</a>
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Self:</strong> <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#bridge_past">Bridge to the Past</a>,
         <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#forge_sleep">the Forge of Sleep</a>, <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#resonance_control">the Resonance of Control</a>
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Statecraft:</strong> <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#butterflies_peace">Butterflies of Peace</a>,
        <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#rightthink">Rightthink Plagues</a>
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradecraft:</strong> <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#all_roads">All Roads</a>,
        <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#mists_concealment">the Mists of Concealment</a>
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>War:</strong> <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#seismic_mastery">Seismic Mastery</a>,
        <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml#threefold_gates">the Threefold Gates of Retribution</a>
      </li>
    </ul>

    <section title="Infrastructure-Scale Expressions">
      <h2 id="big_spell_list">Infrastructure-Scale Expressions</h2>

      <section title="All Roads Lead To..." class="spell">
        <h3 id="all_roads">All Roads Lead To...</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Tradecraft</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Glory, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li><strong>Flow needs:</strong> Minimal across the area affected</li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Warped flow</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Nations using this Expression bend the feet of wanderers toward a
          specific location, typically a capitol or heavily fortified city.
          Locals can get around without (much) trouble, but visitors and spies
          end up turned around, detoured, distracted, and wondering how they
          took a wrong turn. The spell leaks into the Travel lattice, rerouting
          bridges and shifting lattice points when people aren’t looking.
        </p>
        <p>
          This spell can’t simply turn visitors away, but see The Mists of
          Concealment below for that.
        </p>
        <p>
          Some Paths lay down the road-bed in mystic designs or inscribe runes
          with the road network itself. Others stoke the fire for the bricks
          with pieces of homes, to draw people to the nation’s heart.
          Glimmermere simply makes the destination more beautiful and draws the
          eye.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Bridge to the Past" class="spell">
        <h3 id="bridge_past">Bridge to the Past</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Self</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Necromancy</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> Large at the moment of activation
          </li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Chakra Occlusion</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          This is the art by which the Worldmakers bring their willing
          descendants back from the future to aid them in the present. It
          requires much in the way of stable construction, redirected ley lines,
          and flow aspected to feelings of belonging, nostalgia, or deja vu.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art has a variety of odd side-effects, including the travelers
          having odd gaps in their memories (actually a result of branching
          timelines) and the failure of the True Speech (words for concepts that
          haven’t been invented yet). Even the Worldbuilders’ Traditions are
          oddly named because they came from the future - better versions of
          their previous Traditions that have since replaced the forgotten
          originals.
        </p>
        <p>
          The particular variety of Infrastructure-level chakra occlusion
          created by this art is to foil attempts at Precognition within the
          city or nation that employs it. The more people from the future who
          are present, the more impossible the art becomes. The Worldbuilders
          have outlawed research into any reverse version of the spell for fear
          of what it would do to the highly valued art of Psychometry.
          Naturally, Nova is working on it.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Butterflies of Peace" class="spell">
        <h3 id="butterflies_peace">Butterflies of Peace</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Statecraft</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Earthpower, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> Large where the effect is created
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Emotional fatigue, Warped flow
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Sometimes a bit of beauty is all it takes for people to relax. The
          heart comes to rest, peace is easier to feel, and all seems right with
          the world.
        </p>
        <p>
          City-states who deploy the Butterflies of Peace grow special gardens
          to feed them (whether real or in dream), and let them fly with a
          little wind to guide them. Sometimes they’re sent on a journey of a
          thousand miles; other times just to the neighboring city or even to
          certain local neighborhoods. Wherever they go, they spread calm and
          contentment.
        </p>
        <p>
          Note that the Butterflies of Peace are not an expression of the
          War-nature. They can help establish a truce or treaty, but will not
          make an ambush easier or allow armies to invade a lulled population.
          For warlike uses, deploy the Cicadas of False Security, or the Locusts
          of Despite, whose effects and forms are easily distinguished from one
          another. Not that a tool that generates contentment is entirely
          without potential sinister uses, but those they can achieve fall under
          Statecraft.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Dream Factories" class="spell">
        <h3 id="dream_factories">Dream Factories</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Industry</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Alchemy, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> Tremendous on the day the factory is
            moved, Minimal to affected dreamers afterward
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Warped flow, Emotional fatigue
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          The factories required for large-scale magitech industry are large,
          flow-hungry, and often ugly. This art pushes them into the Dream
          Realms. There, they draw on expansive supplies of well-aspected flow
          and don’t need to worry about polluted flow causing issues in nearby
          city-states. The products can be extracted back to the physical world
          and the factory stays out of anyone’s backyard.
        </p>
        <p>
          Of course, the side effects don’t simply go away. Their effects on
          actual dreamers in the nation (or nearby) can be striking. A factory
          sensibly housed in a Dream Realm related to feelings of productivity
          may end up making workers in the Basin feel sluggish when they wake in
          the morning, and they may dread going to sleep at night without
          realizing why. A citizenry trained in oneiromantic techniques will
          eventually figure out what’s going on, but a less dream-savvy populace
          may struggle for months or years before the truth comes out.
        </p>
        <p>
          For factories that <em>create</em> Dream Realms, see the Forge of
          Sleep below.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Flow Dynamics" class="spell">
        <h3 id="flow_dynamics">Flow Dynamics</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Industry</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> All, see below</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> A small fraction of the diverted or
            adjusted flow
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Chaotic flow, Warped flow
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Nearly every civilization adjusts the local flow to some extent. Nova
          Commonwealth refers to this class of techniques as “flow dynamics”,
          and the term has caught on with the Geometers and Those Above.
          Examples of such techniques include:
        </p>
        <ul>
          <li>
            Funneling &amp; channeling flow via wards (Alchemy, Earthpower)
          </li>
          <li>
            Fracturing or merging ley lines in gigantic prisms (Elementalism,
            Glory)
          </li>
          <li>
            Municipal Knots that keeps flow moving in a loop through the city,
            pulling it in from outside (Arete, Alchemy)
          </li>
          <li>
            Filtering aspects to permit certain things and remove others
            (Necromancy, Elementalism)
          </li>
          <li>
            Aspect generators, like meditation centers for calm flow,
            ever-burning flames for inspiration-aspected flow (or simply
            fire-flow), or gratitude centers placed upstream from hospitals to
            generate benevolent flow (Arete, Glory, Necromancy)
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          The more changes that are required to the local flow, the worse the
          side effects will be. The Worldbuilders, with their hunger for
          territory of any kind regardless of its suitability, run into these
          issues often.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="the Forge of Sleep" class="spell">
        <h3 id="forge_sleep">the Forge of Sleep</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Self</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Glory, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> Minimal across a large area, until the
            realm stabilizes
          </li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Chaotic flow</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Someone with the art of Dreamshaping can create new dreams. Groups
          capable of using the Forge of Sleep can create new Dream Realms. These
          are not the tiny Dream Realms created by individual dreamers, linked
          tenuously to existing concepts and emotions. These are vast,
          custom-built existences capable of supporting untold numbers of
          sentient beings.
        </p>
        <p>
          New Dream Realms are particularly tricky to create because there are
          so many already in existence, each tied to a particular thought,
          emotion, or whimsy. The Forge requires coming up with a genuinely new
          thought, or at least one so rare that the previous Dream Realm is weak
          and can be overwritten with the new one.
        </p>
        <p>
          The character of the realm will be shaped by the idea itself, but the
          metaphysics technicians who deploy the rituals and techniques of
          sleep-forging have a great deal of latitude within that space. For
          instance, a world created from the feeling of joy at seeing a whale
          breaching will necessarily have water and whales - but whether it has
          islands, boats, sunshine, rainbows, or nothing but ocean surface as
          far as the eye can see is up for the theurges to decide.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Generative Zones" class="spell">
        <h3 id="generative_zones">Generative Zones</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Research</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Elementalism, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> Varies widely, spread across about a
            city block
          </li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Chaotic flow</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          There is a joke among scholars that a Generative Zone is effectively
          just a wild magic zone and someone with a pad of paper.
        </p>
        <p>
          Generative Zones are created by feeding diverse flows into a small
          area, with a variety of different objects and materials inside, and
          changing up the combination on an irregular basis. Eventually some
          interesting combination of flows and placements will be achieved, and
          a magical effect will manifest. Smaller flows will engender subtle
          effects; larger ones lead to more dramatic manifestations (though not
          necessarily more useful ones). From there it’s a matter of figuring
          out how to replicate the effect, and hoping that it’s actually novel.
        </p>
        <p>
          The mental and emotional states of the researchers are, of course, of
          paramount importance in engendering the effect. Sometimes a degree of
          objectivity in the observer is helpful, but it’s important to test
          different levels of attachment to the outcome, irritation, boredom,
          positivity, etc. Second-degree observers are often employed, who watch
          from a greater remove so as to interfere less with the local emotional
          resonance, but the knowledge that they are being observed also changes
          the local observer’s view of the situation.
        </p>
        <p>
          Most groups that follow the path of wild magic employ Generative Zones
          in their magical research.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="the Gracious Attendants in Miniature" class="spell">
        <h3 id="gracious_attendants">the Gracious Attendants in Miniature</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Industry</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Alchemy, Necromancy</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> Small over the area the spirits are
            active
          </li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Flow depletion</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          The Gracious Attendants in Miniature are a veritable flood of tiny
          automata, all enchanted to obey the commands of those nearby. They are
          created by setting a group of Minuscule Servitors about the task of
          creating automata, and then taking care to provide those automata with
          the flow they need.
        </p>
        <p>
          Gracious Attendants are somewhat specialized, with only a few specific
          tasks they can accomplish. Those created in the Guild can conjure from
          the Consensus Canon or perform Weather-Working to make the weather
          more mild. Those in the Cult, collected and accreted from lost scraps
          of ancient ghosts, can carry messages using Farspeech with one
          another. They also have the unfortunate tendency to spirit-walk out of
          their containment. The gods of the Ægis seek to create a variety that
          heals all who are within, and Guises outsiders so that they may fit in
          regardless of their strangeness.
        </p>
        <p>
          All of these functions are completed without the commanding wizard (or
          even the rare non-wizard!) needing to tap any flow. Only knowledge of
          the access method is required.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Gyre-Fusing Mosaics" class="spell">
        <h3 id="mosaics">Gyre-Fusing Mosaics</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Research</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Alchemy, Arete, Glory</li>
          <li><strong>Flow needs:</strong> Large in a small area</li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Emotional fatigue</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Careful scrutiny of ley lines and ambient flow can tell you what’s
          happening upstream of your location. Gyre-Fusing Mosaics are designed
          to perform some very careful scrutiny indeed, picking apart
          individual eddies of the flow to turn tiny scraps of evidence into a
          larger picture.
        </p>
        <p>
          Gyre-Fusing Mosaics were developed in the Geometer’s Guild as shifting
          tile mosaics of lines and curves. Other civilizations implement the
          same approach in other ways: as ever-weaving tapestries, giant
          mandalas of drifting sand, tubes of bubbling and color-changing
          reagents, even the light on the floor from carefully-arranged stained
          glass.
        </p>
        <p>
          Regardless of physical form, these techniques provide magical scholars
          with a minute-by-minute readout of what natures are being expressed
          upstream, and to what degree. They can’t pick out individual spells,
          but they can find powerful magical creatures, watch energetic events
          like thunderstorms for complex phenomena, and feel ley lines splitting
          or merging tens of thousands of miles downstream. They’re part
          telescope, part spectrometer, part seismograph, and about the size and
          weight of a pipe organ.
        </p>
        <p>
          It’s only a matter of time before this technique moves from Research
          into Tradecraft. The potential to detect an opponent’s mass use of
          Travel or deployment of the Ten-Crore Stones is too valuable to pass
          up.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="the Mists of Concealment" class="spell">
        <h3 id="mists_concealment">the Mists of Concealment</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Tradecraft</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Earthpower, Elementalism, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li><strong>Flow needs:</strong> Small over the affected area</li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Warped flow</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          The “All roads lead to…” art above directs visitors to a specific
          location. The Mists of Concealment make it impossible to find a
          particular place at all. Those who live inside the effect can find
          their way back in if they retain a connection to their homeland (see
          Getting Lost, Sorc page 183). Those outside will contend with the
          Mists every time they attempt to enter.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Mists of Concealment make their lands a somewhat uncomfortable
          place to live. The sky is rarely visible, and only at night.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Raise from the Strata" class="spell">
        <h3 id="raise_strata">Raise from the Strata</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Industry</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Necromancy</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Flow needs:</strong> Tremendous over about a city block
          </li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Flow depletion, Warped flow
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          It is by this art that the Worldbuilders pull structures from the
          distant past into the present. Enough detail is given in their writeup
          in Sorc (page 201) that we need say little here. The ritual is lengthy
          - it takes weeks or months to dredge a new city into the present one
          block at a time - but it’s still much faster than building it.
        </p>
        <p>
          More than one Nova sect is fascinated by this art, as it reaches much
          farther back than Psychometry can, and with less skill required. They
          attempt to adjust it into the Research-Nature, which would allow them
          to sense a greater variety of structures, objects, and perhaps even
          people in the distant past.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="the Resonance of Control" class="spell">
        <h3 id="resonance_control">the Resonance of Control</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Self</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Glory, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li><strong>Flow needs:</strong> Minimal over the affected area</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Warped flow, Emotional burn-in
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Far from being a tool for controling a population, the Resonance of
          Control is a means for the population to control itself. It adjusts
          the flow of a large region - in the case of the Golden Ægis, their
          entire civilization - to help people control their own emotions and
          stay level-headed in the face of danger. The effect is subtle.
          Individuals may still panic, but on the whole, groups panic less, and
          people do what they were taught instead of what their instincts say.
        </p>
        <p>
          Groups that know this art may spend Reserve to de-escalate large-scale
          conflicts even if they don’t have an appropriate Core Value. This
          applies only to groups large enough to qualify for Infrastructure -
          individuals still need an appropriate CV to de-escalate.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Rightthink Plagues" class="spell">
        <h3 id="rightthink">Rightthink Plagues</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Statecraft</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Glory, Oneiromancy</li>
          <li><strong>Flow needs:</strong> Minimal over the affected area</li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Emotional burn-in</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Diadem developed this art in an attempt to remove the Unroyal from
          their territory. Rightthink Plagues make it more difficult to remember
          certain emotions, ideas, and patterns of speech. They thus block
          certain Dream Realms out from a population, making it impossible to
          use them as transit or escape where those people live.
        </p>
        <p>
          Rightthink Plagues are effectively a low-grade Curse That Creeps (see
          Curses in Sorc, page 121). They have the Silent descriptor, so one
          must look for them specifically. If counteracted, the effects
          generally recede. However, if the Plague has been in effect for
          several years, it is likely to have permanently changed its victims’
          habits, and removal of the magical effect will do nothing.
        </p>
        <p>
          Rightthink Plagues are most effective in places where the population
          has been informed that they are being deployed and agrees to it. This
          is the case for most of the nobility and some of the underclass in
          Diadem. The Ægis is considering deploying Rightthink Plagues in its
          own population. It has not told the Unroyal about this yet.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="Seismic Mastery" class="spell">
        <h3 id="seismic_mastery">Seismic Mastery</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> War</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> Earthpower, Elementalism</li>
          <li><strong>Flow needs:</strong> Tremendous in the control center</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Flow depletion, Warped flow
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          When a civilization has a large number of city-states on the same
          continent, they open lines of power and opportunity that were not
          available before. This large-scale War expression drives the flow of
          rage, fire, or passion deep into the Basin’s crust, where it generates
          earthquakes and spawns new volcanoes. An undefended city would be
          reduced to smouldering rubble in hours.
        </p>
        <p>
          Seismic Mastery is one example of large-scale thaumaturgical weaponry.
          Other techniques, such as Weather Mastery, Sea Mastery, etc. could
          also be created along the same lines.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section title="the Threefold Gates of Retribution" class="spell">
        <h3 id="threefold_gates">the Threefold Gates of Retribution</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> War</li>
          <li><strong>Common Founts:</strong> All</li>
          <li><strong>Flow needs:</strong> Large in the places the</li>
          <li><strong>Common side-effects:</strong> Chaotic flow</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Briefly mentioned in Sorcerously Advanced (page 124, alongside Enegy
          Waves), the Threefold Gates of Retribution are a defensive system that
          lashes out when a city is attacked. They are a set of standing stones,
          arcane symbols, ever-ringing bells, or other longstanding magical
          structures, which must be placed outside of the area they protect
          (traditionally in sets of three). As known weak points in a
          city-state’s defense, they are invariably well-defended.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Threefold Gates use the Conflict rules like most any other
          interaction, but that on its own is usually enough to leave a solo
          attacker burned from the inside out by their own power. The Threefold
          Gates are also an important part of Infrastructure-level defenses,
          helping to deflect such measures as Seismic Mastery.
        </p>
      </section>
    </section>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
