<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Introduction" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="introduction" class="title">Introduction</h1>
    <p>
      <em>“The only way to discover the limits of the possible is to go beyond
        them into the impossible.”</em>
    </p>
    <p>-- Arthur C. Clarke</p>
    <p>
      In our world, the word “impossible” has real meaning. Some things can
      happen, though they might be very improbable. Other things simply
      cannot. This may feel smothering, but unbreakable laws of nature are
      honestly pretty great. Our world’s limits provide us a place to live: a
      tiny interface between crushing pressure and harsh vacuum. If all things
      were possible, many of those things would not be the least bit
      beneficial to humanity.
    </p>
    <p>
      However, Sorcerously Advanced is not a scientific universe, and the
      people there are nowhere near discovering the limits of their magic - if
      it even has limits.
    </p>
    <p>
      In that spirit, let us venture a bit beyond what has been possible and
      stretch toward the impossible, to see what it has in store for us.
    </p>

    <p>This book is broken into five chapters:</p>
    <p>
      The
      <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml"><strong>New Expressions</strong></a>
      chapter introduces about a dozen new spells for your characters to
      discover. Some are well-known throughout the Basin, but most are
      recently recovered by the Archive - or, depending on your GM’s plans,
      soon to be recovered.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a href="Infrastructure.xhtml"><strong>Mystical Infrastructure</strong></a>
      gives more detail on Infrastructure-level Expressions, including
      commonly-used techniques for diverting flow, devastating environmental
      attacks, and ways to hide entire nations from observation.
    </p>
    <p>
      In
      <a href="Broken_Technologies.xhtml"><strong>The Broken and the Lost</strong></a>
      we cover two kinds of archaic magic: failed attempts to create Grand
      Wonderworks, and specialized Arts that have fallen out of use over the
      centuries.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a href="Living_Magic.xhtml"><strong>Living with Magic</strong></a>
      talks about what Nature scores really mean, how changing your Tradition
      works in-universe, and a little bit of what it’s like to live with the
      constant influence of magic in each Civilization.
    </p>
    <p>
      Finally, the
      <a href="References.xhtml"><strong>Useful References</strong></a>
      chapter includes a list of spells categorized by descriptor (Connection,
      Loud, or Silent), and lists of suggested aspects for each Expression.
    </p>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
