<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html
  xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
  xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
  xml:lang="en"
  lang="en"
>
  <head>
    <title>Living With Magic</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
  </head>

  <body>
    <section class="chapter" title="Useful References" epub:type="part">
      <h1 id="living_magic">Living With Magic</h1>

      <p>
        This chapter contains essays about what it's like to live with magic in
        the Basin, how people deal with it on a day-to-day basis, and what
        Natures really "mean".
      </p>
      <p>
        Like the Advice chapter in Sorc, this chapter is written from the
        perspective of me, the game designer, talking directly with you, the
        reader.
      </p>

      <h2 id="what_nature_is">
        What "Nature" Is
      </h2>

      <p>
        Sometimes in Sorc I refer to Nature scores by their numerical value for
        convenience, but the best phrase I've found is really "deep in the
        X-Nature." Nature is built via inclination and training, but neither of
        those things are what it really <em>represents</em>. Nature is about
        connection with fundamental aspects of being sentient.
      </p>

      <p>You have Nature because that's <em>who you are.</em></p>

      <p>
        More accurately, you have <em>potential</em> Nature because of who you
        are. Properly expressing your Nature requires tools and training. Spells
        are those tools, which is why spells are often referred to as
        Expressions. Someone who is very combative and aggressive but knows no
        actual spells of War will have a very low effective War score, and would
        get trounced by someone with a better ability to express their Nature.
        For ease of game play we don't track potential Nature scores - we only
        track <em>effective</em> scores, the ones that determine what you can
        actually use. I'll talk more about this below.
      </p>

      <p>
        When one person has two different Traditions, their Nature scores can
        vary for two reasons. First, they might not always have the skills
        necessary to express all that they are. Second, Traditions represent not
        only metaphysical paths and sources of power, but also mindsets and
        habits of thought. Some people, when they change Traditions, take on
        such a different mentality that their Nature scores must change to
        represent that. For example, ghosts from the Cult use The Practice for
        their day-to-day life or work, and The Rage when they need (or want) to
        fight. Nearly all Cultists have a higher War-Nature in when they're in
        The Rage. That's what The Rage is
        <em>for</em>. It not only has more tools to express the War-nature,
        people instinctively swap into it it when they know they're going to
        have to fight for their lives, or when they're expressing deep emotional
        pain.
      </p>

      <h3 id="concept_separation">Separating the Game Attributes</h3>

      <p>
        If you're having trouble figuring out exactly what's supposed to go into
        Natures, Core Values, and Professions, and why I'm saying that skill is
        part of Nature when it clearly belongs in a Profession, these concepts
        are <em>intentionally not well-separated</em> in this game. If you want
        a set of game attributes that doesn't overlap, here are two options:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Remove Natures and
          <strong>play just with CVs and Professions</strong>. Use Professions
          to gate Expressions - keep the same minimum requirement but let the
          player choose appropriate Professions that are required instead of
          Nature. Make the Conflict total into CV x Profession, with any bonuses
          adding to Profession.
        </li>
        <li>
          Do the reverse: remove CVs and Professions and
          <strong>use just Natures</strong> in the game. Make the Conflict total
          into Nature x Same Nature. Some conflicts might better be represented
          by Nature x Different Nature, but that's up to you. Any bonuses are
          added to <em>one</em> of the Nature scores (not both).
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h2 id="what_nature_says">What Nature Says</h2>

      <p>
        As mentioned in Sorc (page 104), children are born without magic. Their
        effective Nature scores are 1. Where they go from there depends on how
        they grow up and who they become.
      </p>

      <h3 id="nature_1">Nature 1</h3>

      <p>
        In an adult, scores of 1 most often indicate a lack of interest in that
        particular area. Someone who doesn't have a deceptive bone in their body
        will have Trickery 1. Someone who wouldn't hurt a fly would have War 1.
      </p>

      <p>
        Their disinterest also means they won't train in that area. Their lack
        of skill means that their effective Nature will be low even if they
        suddenly wish it weren't. Scores of 1 can be a result of not receiving
        any experience or training in a particular area. It's
        <em>possible</em> for a very productive person who enjoys making things
        with their hands to have Industry 1, but it's very unlikely. In our
        world, the equivalent would be someone who says they love crafting but
        have never learned to knit, never practiced whittling, doesn't garden,
        doesn't cook, and in short have evaded almost every opportunity to learn
        and practice the arts of Industry.
      </p>

      <p>
        People raised in Null Zones always have an <em>effective</em> score of 1
        in their Natures. While it might make sense for e.g. a very
        compassionate person to have Communion 2 or higher, a lack of flow makes
        it impossible for them to access the benefits of their true selves.
        Returners raised outside a null zone, where flow is broadly available,
        <em>actually do</em> have Natures limited to 1. They're been raised to
        avoid strong emotions. As you can guess, this kind of mental
        conditioning doesn't always work.
      </p>

      <h3 id="nature_2_4">Nature 2-4</h3>

      <p>
        Growing children, adolescents, and young adults raise their Natures by
        following their interests and learning more about them. Most adults will
        have Nature scores between 2 and 4.
      </p>

      <p>
        People with Nature 2 or 4 are what you might think of as "normally
        interested" in a particular area. You might say, "If want to learn some
        shapechanging tricks, talk to Ley-Star-Wealth. They're really into it."
        Or, "Sprint of Seventh Ward? Yeah, she never really liked geometry,
        can't conjure a sturdy house to save her life." They're within the
        typical expected range of interests and abilities in the Basin.
      </p>

      <p>
        Nature 3 is a fairly common baseline across the Basin. Certain Natures
        can be lower in certain civilizations. War, especially, is lower across
        more peaceful regions. Other Natures tend to be day-to-day requirements
        for life and society. Nature 3 has a number of very enticing benefits:
        Universal Repositories, improved Immortality, Travel, reading people
        more effectively, pranking people with the Shell Game... These things
        are a <em>big deal</em>, especially when your peer group has them and
        you don't. They're marks of adulthood.
      </p>

      <h3 id="nature_5">Nature 5</h3>

      <p>
        Nature 5 requires a lot of interest and a lot of effort, with the former
        typically leading to the latter. Nature 5 isn't truly <em>rare</em> -
        you'll find quite a few people with Nature 5 in any given city - but
        this level comes from a substantial focus.
      </p>

      <p>
        Nature 5 doesn't have a lot of new techniques as compared with Nature 4,
        at least in the game as written so far. However, it's still twice as
        fast in Rituals, more potent, and opens up a few odd tricks that people
        won't expect and don't always plan for. Even in a world where everyone's
        a magician, Nature 5 is a step above. As the average magical prowess of
        the Basin increases (see
        <a href="#advance_of_magic">The Advance Of Magic</a> below), these will
        become game-changers in the lives of people across the world.
      </p>

      <h3 id="maintain_nature">Maintaining Natures</h3>

      <p>Maintaining Nature 1 or 2 takes nothing.</p>

      <p>
        Maintaining Nature 3 takes some work, but not a lot. Leisure time is
        fairly commonly available across the Basin, so most people find a few
        hours a week to "work out", as it were.
      </p>

      <p>
        Maintaining Nature 4 and 5 takes more work, so they're generally
        connected to someone's role in society. Profession and Nature are
        mutually reinforcing in this world. A healer finds it much easier to
        maintain Communion 5 because it's the muscle they use day in and day
        out. A scholar's high Mystery score is kept sharp by the translation
        work they do.
      </p>

      <h3 id="advance_of_magic">The Advance Of Magic</h3>

      <p>
        The average magical prowess of Basin natives is increasing with time.
      </p>

      <p>
        When the Gift was given, everyone had an effective Nature cap of 3. Many
        spells were unknown, or known only to a handful of magi like the
        Fellowship of Truth or the Geometer's Guild. Most people didn't know
        efficient processes by which to attain a deeper connection with their
        Natures. Even if someone managed to attain a Nature of 4 or 5, they had
        no tools with which to express it. Their <em>effective</em>
        Nature was still 3. Even the Fellowship and the Geometers were capped at
        3 at that time. The Gift opened up a greater potential in them, but they
        couldn't take advantage of it. Many people were stuck at 2 until they
        stole, rediscovered, or invented new Expressions.
      </p>

      <p>
        Over time, as magical research and archaeology expanded the tools
        available, Nature 4 and 5 became accessible. People also learned
        effective ways to reach higher Nature scores faster. This process of
        growth hasn't stopped. Some time in the not-too-distant future, Nature 6
        will be just as accessible as Nature 5 is now. The exact timeline for
        this is left up to the GM, but it's unlikely to be a smooth and uniform
        transition. Some Natures will no doubt come earlier by coincidence or
        necessity.
      </p>

      <p>
        Will there be Nature 7 eventually? Yes. Nature 8, 9, 10? Yes. Some day,
        Nature 5 will be what people achieve when they're not very interested in
        what they're doing. It's going to be a hell of a time.
      </p>

      <p>
        If you want to play this process out, go for it. You might have a game
        that skips centuries, or one where all of this happens in a rapidly
        accelerating singularity scenario. (I recommend allowing higher
        Profession levels as well, since using a Profession involves magic for
        nearly everyone.)
      </p>

      <h2 id="change_trad">Changing Traditions</h2>
      <p>
        What's the process for changing Traditions? What does your character
        actually <em>do</em>, and why does it cost Reserve?
      </p>

      <p>
        In game terms, a Tradition is a Path, a Fount, and a set of Core
        Expressions. In the <em>world</em> of the game, a Tradition encompasses
        much more. It's a way of thinking, a set of tools, and an approach to
        life. It's a connection to a universal emanation of power. Traditions
        are enmeshed with culture and mindset.
      </p>

      <p>
        To switch Traditions, a magus puts down the tools of their old trade and
        takes up new ones. In simpler cases they put away dusts and powders and
        ready a compass and stylus, or perhaps clear their voice and take a deep
        breath to sing. Other magi have greater challenges. Those who walk the
        path of Belief must put those beliefs down. Those with Patrons must
        beseech and appease them. Even two Traditions that share a Path will
        have differences in interpretation and intent. As anyone who has learned
        multiple languages or martial arts styles knows, sometimes the closest
        pairings are the hardest to keep separate.
      </p>

      <p>
        Changing Traditions costs Reserve because all of that takes effort and
        creates waste. Blood magic requires an initial investment. Wild magic
        disrupts other effects. Careful procedures can mitigate these issues,
        but the very mindset of caution is not conducive to some forms of magic!
        In the end, only extensive practice makes the transition smooth - or as
        smooth as possible.
      </p>

      <p>
        The Twist effects of changing Traditions come purely from metagame
        concerns. There's no in-world effect, so there's no in-world
        justification needed.
      </p>

      <h2 id="everyday_magic">Everyday Magic</h2>

      <p>
        If you walk down a stereotypical street in any given civilization, what
        does it look like? What's happening that might be surprising to someone
        who isn't used to it? The corebook already covers some of this, so I'll
        skip details that have already been discussed.
      </p>

      <ul>
        <li>
          <strong>the Cult</strong>: Most people are a bit see-through. You'll
          still see children (who are also ghosts) and pets (sometimes ghosts,
          but not always) running and playing. Solid-looking people are less
          likely to be mortals and more likely to be different kinds of ghosts
          from other civilizations. People talk "to themselves" frequently -
          they're actually communing with their ancestors. Strange, baroque
          expressions of speech are common, as the True Speech translates
          linguistic magic into comprehensible words. If there's a problem
          brewing, everyone's going to know about it as the manifestations of
          the Rage rise: deep sounds, green flame, and the ground shaking
          angrily.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Diadem</strong>: Class is everything in Diadem. A few
          examples: A fair number of people in Diadem have mixed the intangible
          with their physical forms. The upperclass, with the tradition of
          Transubstantiation, hybridize with thought and emotion. The
          underclass, with Drudgery, become part elemental. The upperclass wears
          face paint and body rouge infused with magical reagents. Some of the
          underclass come from cultures that wear face paint, but they don't do
          it here because of the social implications. The underclass read and
          debate and exercise for the Path of Discipline, often in public. The
          upperclass buy their reagents and practice mixing them away from
          judgmental eyes. Upperclass homes are spiraling shells and horns;
          underclass homes are solid stone blocks. The upperclass comes to
          underclass areas seeking entertainment, labor, or exotic things from
          far-away lands. The underclass visit upperclass areas as little as
          possible - generally only when they are employed for a specific
          purpose.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>the Geometers</strong>: Unlike in many civilizations, much of
          the actual <em>magic</em> of the Guild is invisible. The causes are
          clear - lines, arcs, etc. - but the effects are often internal,
          hidden, or purely mental. It's the knock-on effects of magic, the
          second-order effects, that are visible. Mutitasking rituals in the
          Guild create automata, so a fair number of automata walk the streets
          and stand in key locations, helping with any tasks simple enough for
          their programming. Using Travel requires reaching a nexus, where
          thousands of nodes have been pulled together, so many people adopt
          faster modes of local transportation, like flight or space-warping
          tricks for running. Satori is a common enhanced experience in the
          Guild, so most infrastructure is either brilliantly engineered or a
          mess of competing priorities.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Glimmermere</strong>: Expect the fantastic, the fanciful, and
          the phantasmagorical. A spiral staircase goes nowhere, but the door at
          the top opens to a secret, hidden house. Swaths of colors across the
          sky match the mood, dark and ominous where grave matters are
          discussed, bright and comforting where children are raised. Here, any
          form of art is likely a form of magic, and everything is a suitable
          canvas. Even the grass might be groomed into a vast carpet of beauty
          that shifts the clouds, themselves a work of art made to lend wisdom
          and inspiration.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>the Ægis</strong>: Many people expect religious rituals to be
          common in Ægis cities, which they are. What surprises them is that the
          worship is for each other and for their holy purpose, showing respect
          to the young, venerating the wise, and pledging service to the needy.
          The Ægis’ gods themselves participate in this worship. Most
          Shieldbearers can fly, so streets are sparsely populated, but the
          skyways are full and well-regulated. One might see light suddenly
          shine down from above as travelers receive messages from their godly
          patrons. There might initially seem to be no children outside, but
          that’s only because such a large percentage of their population is
          Sprung Full-Grown.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>the Hearth-Kin</strong>: Hearth-kin space takes some getting
          used to. The vast hometrees are awe-inspiring, of course, but it's
          easier to get used to those than to the Hearth-Kin day-to-day. For
          instance, it's never really dark on a Hometree. It can be shadowy at
          night, but each tree is a tiny city-state with glowing fruits hanging
          from boughs, leaves reflecting the light back inward, and thousands of
          people with glowing eyes. Another good example is the blood magic.
          Nearly everyone on the street knows blood magic and uses it on a
          regular basis. You'll see people drawing their own blood, or helping
          someone else do it. No citizen thinks twice about letting a friend cut
          their thumb and draw in blood on their forehead - that's how their
          magic works.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Nova</strong>: Every sect of Nova is unique, and
          <em>strongly, specifically</em> unique. Whatever research is happening
          within that particular cult, it's going to tinge everything they do,
          and everyone's going to have a role in making it happen. Think beyond
          just Nature: no one investigates the entire Industry-nature. They
          research the conjuration of magical implements, or the structure of
          the Travel lattice, or creating faster methods of flight. A sect
          investigating the limits of cloning will be bringing in magical
          resources, building clone test facilities, implementing ways to handle
          multiple rituals at once, cloning themselves, and so forth. Another
          one might be looking into unorthodox uses of Guising. They'll be
          testing out how much "being a local" covers - navigation? Spying? Is
          it possible to intentionally <em>break</em> Guising or reverse it so
          as to <em>spot</em> spies? Some citizens might appear almost
          identical, others might have malfunctioning Guising and seem totally
          alien. Stretching the limits means embracing failure.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>the Sovereigns</strong>: Ok, so there are demons, and the
          world is full of force and flash. Everyone knows that. What else?
          Sovereign language has no genders except in very intimate terms of
          address. When someone comes from a highly gendered civilization with
          gendered language, the True Speech simply elides pronouns.
          Sovereign language is also surprisingly non-hierarchical, with few terms of
          authority, submission, veneration, or even disrespect. In a culture
          where everyone considers themselves a ruler, subject to none,
          Sovereigns also gather primarily in small groups, because everyone
          involved is going to want to be heard and otherwise it takes too
          long to get anything done. Sovereigns are not patient people.
        </li>
        <li><strong>Those Above</strong>:</li>
        <li>
          <strong>the Unroyal</strong>: The dream worlds the Unroyal inhabit are
          very different from those of Glimmermere. They are purposeful where
          Glimmermere is fanciful, cubist where Glimmermere is expressionist.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>the Worldbuilders</strong>: When you come across another
          person during the day they're likely to be at work, many of them
          contributing to the rituals that
          <a href="Infrastructure#raise_strata"
            >call pieces of the city from the distant past</a
          >. Those who aren't working on the city are likely teaching or taking
          care of children - most citizens raise children, whether their own or
          adopted. After work, many people have artistic hobbies - you'll see a
          lot of animated murals, walking statues, and impossible architecture.
          Many of these tie into the Worldbuilders' extensive fanfic archives.
          You're also likely to see a few spirits connected to the city, its
          structure, and its elements, moving about and directing the flow as
          needed to improve the city. Some people will be in elemental form,
          usually air or earth. The weather will never be too extreme, though
          during festivals it might be psychedelic.
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3 id="outside_society">Outside of Society</h3>
      <p>Some people leave society behind.</p>
      <p>
        It's easy to walk away. There are no physical needs for which a
        reasonably magically educated adult cannot provide. If you want to go
        whole-hog, you can disconnect from Industry and never have a need in
        your life again, but most people don't choose that route. Spend a bit of
        Reserve and you can build a house, conjure non-perishable food, and keep
        most predators at bay.
      </p>
      <p>
        What's harder for most people is leaving their friends behind. You
        always say you'll visit, you're never more than 5 koss away, there's the
        Universal Repositories if you want to write... but still, out of sight
        is out of mind for a lot of people, and everyone knows it. It's common
        for people to come back and invite friends to join them, or to gather a
        group of people and leave together. The human mind prefers a large
        circle of about 150 friends and acquaintances (depending on changes from
        Becoming), and most people leave with far fewer than that, leading to
        some difficult living situations.
      </p>
      <p>
        Reasons for leaving vary. Some people decide they're morally opposed to
        their civilization's activities. This is most common amongst Diadem
        (especially the underclass) and the Sovereigns. Other people can't find
        the connection they want (Those Above, the Worldbuilders). Some people
        leave because they're badly depressed and they can't believe that anyone
        loves them or cares about them. It's not unheard-of for someone to leave
        from a lack of enthusaism for their civ's goals (Unroyal, Nova), but
        it's fairly rare. Most people who feel a litle burned out will stick
        around for their friends and just step back from the more intense
        activities.
      </p>
      <p>
        If you come across someone in the wilderness who's left their
        civilization, things can vary a lot. Some people will recreate the sort
        of house they're used to from childhood. Others get creative with odd
        geometries and weird architecture, or houses built of flowers, or paths
        and roads made of shadow, or just plain moving into a Dream Realm. Most
        do some amount of foraging from the local environment. Some people
        prefer to live in the air, separate not only from their civilizations
        but from the Basin itself. Others walk hidden paths in the wilderness,
        never keeping a home, reconnecting with a natural world they felt
        distant from.
      </p>
      <p>
        Nearly everyone who leaves picks up some sort of hobby. It's easy to get
        bored with no one around, or even if you live in a conclave of 20-50
        people. Wherever people live, their hobbies will be visible. Some people
        play with the weather; their homes are easy to spot from far away thanks
        to the cloud patterns. Some carve wood or stone, leaving statues
        standing nearby. Some build homes close to ancient magitech devices, the
        better to study and perhaps even repair them. Even those who dabble in
        dreams will leave traces that the Sixth Sense can pick up on.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most long-time hermits have lost interest in the niceties of polite
        society. What this means depends on what "polite society" meant in their
        previous homes. For the Hearth-Kin, it means they might not offer you
        food the moment you arrive, and might not ask about your troubles until
        you offer. For the Sovereigns, it means they might not bother to try
        insulting you, or they might have thrown aside their mask and robe to
        live with their bodies visible.
      </p>
      <p>
        In game terms, leaving your civilization does <strong>not</strong> mean
        that you erase it from your character sheet. If the civ's Core Values
        are still part of you (very likely, you were raised here), then in game
        terms you're treated as if you're still part of that group. See Sorc
        page 15 for related details.
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>
