<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>New Expressions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Character Creation" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="new_expressions">New Expressions</h1>
    <p>
      This section contains new Expressions for all six Natures. Each is
      suitable for selection as a Core Expression.
    </p>
    <p>
      Our intention is that GMs may use the Arts in this book as story hooks
      and rewards for successful Archive expeditions. Each Art lists the place
      where it was discovered by the Archive before being placed in the
      Universal Repositories. GMs, feel free to adjust these as you see fit
      for your games. Let your players know which ones are available at game
      start and which must be discovered later. If you are uncertain as to
      which to choose, we recommend that Sea-work, Oath-taking, Psychotropics,
      and Splinching be widely known at the beginning of your game, and the
      rest be held back for discovery during play.
    </p>

    <section title="Notes">
      <h2 id="notes">Notes</h2>

      <h3 id="prereq_arts">On Prerequisite Arts</h3>
      <p>
        Many of the Expressions in this book are advanced spells with a set of
        “Prerequisite Arts” listed. These are the magical techniques that must
        be available in order to cast those spells. One does not need to have
        the prerequisites as Core Expressions, but without them, the Art costs
        an extra point of Reserve for each prerequisite that is currently
        unavailable. Each point of Reserve represents an Expression being
        “spun up” and made available in order for the advanced spell to be
        cast.
      </p>

      <h3 id="arts_by_nature">List of Arts by Nature</h3>

      <ul>
        <li>
          <strong>Communion:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#bonded_support">Bonded Support</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#entwined_objects">Entwined Objects</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Industry:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#boundless_transformation">Boundless Transformation</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#sea_work">Sea-work</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Mystery:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#judiciary_automata">Judiciary Automata</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#signature_ciphers">Signature Ciphers</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#stutter_stepping">Stutter-stepping</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Self:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#oath_taking">Oath-taking</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#psychotropics">Psychotropics</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#shadow_familiars">Shadow Familiars</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Trickery:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#aspect_poisoning">Aspect poisoning</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#stutter_stepping">Stutter-stepping</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>War:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#hyperfighting">Hyperfighting</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#splinching">Splinching</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Any:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#miniscule_servitors">Miniscule Servitors</a>
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3 id="arts_by_type">List of Arts by Type</h3>

      <ul>
        <li>
          <strong>Universal:</strong> None of the new arts are Universal.
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Common:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#entwined_objects">Entwined Objects</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#oath_taking">Oath-taking</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#psychotropics">Psychotropics</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Restricted:</strong>
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#aspect_poisoning">Aspect poisoning</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#bonded_support">Bonded Support</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#boundless_transformation">Boundless Transformation</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#hyperfighting">Hyperfighting</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#judiciary_automata">Judiciary Automata</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#miniscule_servitors">Miniscule Servitors</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#sea_work">Sea-work</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#shadow_familiars">Shadow Familiars</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#signature_ciphers">Signature Ciphers</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#splinching">Splinching</a>,
          <a href="NewExpressions.xhtml#stutter_stepping">Stutter-stepping</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <strong>Grand Wonderwork:</strong> None of the new arts are Grand
          Wonderworks. However, see the
          <a href="Broken_Technologies.xhtml#broken_tech">Broken Technologies</a>
          section for mystic infrastructure that reached toward that level...
          and fell short.
        </li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section title="List of Expressions">
      <h2 id="spell_list">List of Expressions</h2>

      <section title="aspect_poisoning" class="spell">
        <h3 id="aspect_poisoning">Aspect poisoning</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Trickery</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> the Shell Game</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Silent</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Small</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Chaotic flow</li>
        </ul>

        <p>
          Most people are balanced with regard to the flow their bodies
          create. Aspect poisoning sets someone’s flow off-balance, shifting
          their Earthly Form to Aspected (Sorc page 20) or changing the aspect
          of those who are already Aspected. Because the change is sudden and
          unexpected, the effects are almost always negative.
        </p>
        <p>
          Someone poisoned with the fire-aspect might burn things they touch.
          A ghost from the Cult poisoned with brightness might still be a
          ghost, but would find their body acting very differently and their
          now-light-aspected necromancy producing unexpected results. Aspect
          poisoning can spill over into the victim’s emotional states as well:
          a warrior “poisoned” with the aspect of peace would find it
          difficult to be violent, and a diplomat “poisoned” with laughter
          would struggle to lead effective negotiations.
        </p>
        <p>
          Treat aspect poisoning much like curses, but with less vitriol and
          more satire.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was discovered in Worldbuilder territory, in the ruins of a
          perpetually darkened temple to a laughing, long-fanged god. It was
          incribed on a cylinder of obsidian, protected in layers of clay,
          bound with a seal so old that it crumbled before it could be read.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="bonded_support" class="spell">
        <h3 id="bonded_support">Bonded Support</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Communion</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> Knotwork</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Silent</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Moderate</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Emotional burn-in</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Knotwork (Sorc, page 130) creates a loop of flow that anyone with
          the right Path can access at a later date, tying it into a physical
          object or pattern. Bonded support is similar, but it ties the loop
          into one person’s bond with another. When you pledge your bonded
          support to someone, you give them a one-time use of a Moderate
          amount of flow. They might decide to pass that flow on to someone
          else when they release the knot, but it cannot be stolen from them,
          and most people won’t even realize it’s there unless they’re looking
          for it.
        </p>
        <p>
          Bonded support can be accessed from within Null Zones. No one can
          hold more than a Moderate amount of flow in bonded support, though
          they might hold Small amounts from multiple people. Much like knotwork,
          bonded support is often represented in physical form, as a small
          gift like jewelry or origami. It can also be given in less tangible
          forms, like poems or oaths. Some Geometers use tattoos from their
          friends to store their support again and again.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was discovered in Uinofa Thrice-Blessed, a Dream Realm of
          joy and forgiveness. It was gathered from the echoes that still ring
          in that place, pieced together through precognitive methods.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="boundless_transformation" class="spell">
        <h3 id="boundless_transformation">Boundless Transformation</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Industry 4+</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> The Ten-Crore Stones of Death
          </li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Access, Loud</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Large</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side effects:</strong> Chaotic flow, Warped flow
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          The Ten-Crore Stones (Sorc page 143) destroy via transmutation,
          augmenting existing aspects of flow until light vaporizes stone or
          fear destroys thought. With a lighter touch, however, the Stones can
          be turned to more peaceful uses.
        </p>
        <p>
          This Art uses a small amount of flow as a reference and retrofits
          large amounts of nearby matter to match. Presented with a handful of
          tiny gemstones, the Stones can turn a hillside into solid diamond. A
          breath, and winds carve a riverbed. A seedling grapevine can flood a
          field with ripe grapes ready for the picking, and a child’s warm
          blanket can engender whole cozy cottages. There are limitless
          applications.
        </p>
        <p>
          It should be noted that, while the Industry-nature is not actively
          antagonistic toward living creatures in the way that the War-nature
          is, it does not take particular care around them either. Being
          overgrown with grapevines in a matter of seconds is an uncomfortable
          experience. Treat this as an attack with Nature equal to the
          caster’s Industry - 2 and use the Four Questions to resolve it.
        </p>
        <p>
          There may also be novel applications of the Stones available via
          Mystery, Trickery, or Communion. Researchers are still working to
          uncover such arts.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was discovered inscribed upon one of the Stones themselves.
          The discoverer was transmuted to some unknown dense purple metal and
          plunged back to the Basin. Their recovery took years, but they never
          forgot the inscription.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="entwined_objects" class="spell">
        <h3 id="entwined_objects">Entwined Objects</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Communion</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Common</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Connection, Ritual</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Trivial</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Emotional burn-in</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          The term “entwined objects” is a misnomer. In truth, there is a
          single object in multiple places at the same time.
        </p>
        <p>
          If the object is a book, the writing from one person is visible to
          all. If one is burned, they all are. If the object is an apple, when
          one person takes a bite it disappears from everyone’s. Coins dropped
          into an entwined jar are still only present for the person who put
          them in - it’s the jar that’s entwined, not the coins. If two people
          knowingly hold the same object, they have a mystic connection to
          each other.
        </p>
        <p>
          Creating an entwined object that is person-sized or smaller is a
          Craft Ritual requiring Communion 2 and Theurge 2. Larger objects
          require longer Rituals. Living beings may start off entwined (e.g.
          if they are both created via Cloning), but will slowly become
          independent of one another.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was discovered in Geometer territory, in The Temples Of The
          Bowl. In these places, separated by thousands of miles, water from
          three springs pours endlessly into a single bowl. Its underside is
          incribed with the required chants and hand gestures to produce more.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="Hyperfighting" class="spell">
        <h3 id="hyperfighting">Hyperfighting</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> War</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Silent</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Small</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Emotional burn-in</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Some Paths and Founts don’t lend themselves very well to War’s usual
          techniques. For more subtle (but no less effective) applications of
          War, a magus might call on precognitive flashes, extraordinary
          strategic thinking, or millions of years of honed instincts. Arete
          practitioners and Oneiromancers use this Art most frequently.
        </p>
        <p>
          Hyperfighting doesn’t have the useful side-effects that other
          manifestations of War do, such as lighting a room with an energy
          blast or slicing a roast with extra-sharp weapons, but it’s easier
          to pass it off as ordinary to those who don’t know how to look.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was discovered in clay tablets, as part of an ancient style
          manual for a family of warrior-magi. Their enemies apparently
          discovered them and buried their city in volcanic ash. Lost before
          the age of immortality, their souls passed on long ago.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="judiciary_automata" class="spell">
        <h3 id="judiciary_automata">Judiciary Automata</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Mystery</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> Mystic Servitors, Universal
            Repositories
          </li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Ex Nihilo, Ritual</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Moderate</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Emotional burn-in</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          The Brightgarden Schema, the Basin’s most widespread legal system,
          requires that rulings be recorded in as permanent a form as is
          readily available. Even in the pre-Gift era, that generally meant
          the Universal Repositories. Libraries worth of legal precedent and
          case law are stored there, if only one knows how to look. This Art
          creates an automaton that knows how to look.
        </p>
        <p>
          Only simple legal rulings, where recorded precedent exists within
          the Brightgarden Schema, can be accessed. Even with this limitation,
          the Geometer’s Guild estimates that judiciary automata have cut down
          the demand on judges’ and lawyers’ time by over 40%, freeing them to
          work more conscientiously on more difficult cases.
        </p>
        <p>
          This is a complex task for an automaton. Increase the ritual time by
          +1 time steps. The creator must have the Lawyer profession at 2+.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was invented by Flux of Nine Pines, of the Geometer’s
          Guild.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="miniscule_servitors" class="spell">
        <h3 id="miniscule_servitors">Miniscule Servitors</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Varies</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> Mystic Servitors</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Ex Nihilo, Ritual</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Moderate</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Flow depletion</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Mystic Servitors are generally human-sized automata, but they don’t
          have to be. For example, some Worldbuilders create giant cranes and
          gantries to assist with construction. Smaller servitors are
          typically used as scouts, but some Nova researchers employ tiny
          creatures for microscopic investigations or adjustments, and some
          Hearth-kin nature-workers use armies of termites to build or
          demolish. Use the same guidelines from Sorc (page 132), with one
          “temporary servant” worth of miniscule servitors actually being
          anywhere between a hundred and several thousand.
        </p>
        <p>
          As with regular mystic servitors, miniscule servitors’ abilities
          depend on the Nature one uses to create them. Communion servitors
          hold messages until someone walks by to hear them. Industry
          servitors build by moving millions of small pieces into place,
          though they’ll have trouble with heavier blocks. Those made with
          Mystery can see tiny things and sneak through small cracks (though
          big things are distorted to their senses). Trickery servitors can
          blind and confuse. War servitors can cut blood vessels and choke air
          passages. No one has yet found a use for tiny servitors of Self, but
          it is likely only a matter of time.
        </p>
        <p>
          Thus far the smallest servitors are about the size of a flea. They
          must be constantly maintained with a Moderate amount of flow or they
          fall to pieces, but this cost will likely go down as the spells that
          create them are fine-tuned.
        </p>
        <p>
          Initial attempts at this art were made by Nova Commonwealth
          researchers, but progress was only really made when they
          cross-referenced their work with records that the Archive was
          attempting to translate. Those were lifted from the bottom of the
          sea, in a trench held in stasis by exposure to elemental ice. The
          words were carved into the ice with letters fifty meters deep.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="oath_taking" class="spell">
        <h3 id="oath_taking">Oath-taking</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Self</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Common</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> See below</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Minimal</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Emotional burn-in</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          One of the earliest arts children discover is to bind themselves to
          promises. (“I hereby pinky-swear that I will...”) It can come as a
          surprise to some when their very Self holds them to their word. Most
          adults grow out of this, but in some Traditions it is considered
          important or virtuous to take oaths.
        </p>
        <p>
          Oath-taking works very much like Cursing oneself. Simply select the
          type of curse that will take effect and it will be so. Oaths are
          Silent (Sorc page 112) while they wait, but not when they are cast
          or when they act.
        </p>
        <p>
          Oaths are not vicious or spiteful as curses are, but they are
          tenacious to a fault. To deny the oath, and refuse both to act in
          accordance and to take the curse, is to disconnect from Self.
        </p>
        <p>
          Very few people have Oath-taking as a Core Expression. Instead, they
          spend a point of Reserve to swear a binding oath.
        </p>
        <p>This art is common across the Basin.</p>
      </section>

      <section title="psychotropics" class="spell">
        <h3 id="psychotropics">Psychotropics</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Self</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Common</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Minimal</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side effects:</strong> Emotional burn-in, Emotional
            fatigue
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Psychotropic magic alters the caster’s perception and sense of
          reality. This art might use the expected powders, vapors, or
          mushrooms - but more esoteric methods exist, including warped
          mirrors, specialized meditation, gazing crystals, snuff made of
          solidified dreams, or ecstatic communion with the almighty Aion.
        </p>
        <p>
          Mystical psychotropics are a scalpel compared to the hammer of
          natural mind-affecting substances. They can show the same vision
          every time, bring particular memories to the front, or engender
          specific feelings. They can be incredibly useful for those seeking a
          specific mindset, such as the benevolence of a healer or the calm of
          an Arete practitioner. Some uses can be as addictive as any drug,
          wearing deep channels in one’s mind and habits, blocking access to
          those emotions until the effect is applied again.
        </p>
        <p>
          Psychotropics are a good opportunity to trigger the Worst Enemy Rule
          (Sorc pg 57), but can also be perfectly harmless or enjoyable. Using
          psychotropic arts on oneself is just a matter of describing the
          effect. Dosing someone else with a mystical drug uses the
          Hallucination art rather than this one.
        </p>
        <p>
          Diadem takes credit for the recent development and popularization of
          this art, but there is ample evidence of its prior discovery and use
          elsewhere.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="sea_work" class="spell">
        <h3 id="sea_work">Sea-work</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Industry</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Varies</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Warped flow</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          As Weather-working twists the skies and Nature-work bends plants and
          animals to the caster’s needs, Sea-work affects the ocean. It can
          change currents, ease winds, bring gales, swamp ships with waves,
          fend off creatures from the deep, or set those beasts against one’s
          enemies.
        </p>
        <p>
          Sea-work’s control over the weather works exactly like
          Weather-working (Sorc page 149), except that it’s only effective on
          the shores of seas or tremendous lakes. Its control over animals and
          plants extends only to those that live underwater (or mostly so),
          and works like Nature-Working in those situations (Sorc page 133)
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was reintroduced to the Basin by the Windblown (Sorc page
          215), who claim to have kept it from an older culture.
          Investigations by the Archive show that this art must have been
          common amongst island-dwelling magi at one time.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="shadow_familiars" class="spell">
        <h3 id="shadow_familiars">Shadow Familiars</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Self</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> Soul-work</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Silent when hiding</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> None</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          To create a sentient creature to do one’s magical bidding, one must
          take it from one’s own self. Thus, the shadow familiar, or soul
          familiar. Shadow familiars are created by carefully cutting off a
          piece of one’s own soul, folding it origami-like into shape, and
          enchanting it with one’s own essence and psyche. They are always
          dark, often translucent, usually small and easily hidden. Many take
          the form of shadowy birds or snakes, and hide in wait in the magus’
          own shadow until they are called forth.
        </p>
        <p>
          Shadow familiars have Nature scores like any other character.
          Typically those scores are limited to the character’s own Natures
          (or lower), but occasionally they can be higher, such as when a
          low-magic character’s friends might enchant a powerful familiar to
          keep them safe. Use the higher of each score between the familiar
          and its owner when calculating Power and Import.
        </p>
        <p>
          Many shadow familiars are disconnected from War and Industry, making
          them incapable of most physical interactions but also nearly
          untouchable. They use Self for quick movement and Trickery to steal.
          They seak and spy with Mystery and carry messages with Communion,
          which also keeps them in constant Rapport with their controller.
        </p>
        <p>
          Necromancers are far more likely to be comfortable with the
          manipulation and enchantment of one’s own soul, making shadow
          familiars most common amongst the Sovereigns and the Cult. Members
          of the Soulpact often risk a piece of their own soul this way, to
          have a companion in their difficult and sometimes lonely work.
        </p>
        <p>
          The GM should let characters with this Expression play their own
          familiar. It is, after all, nothing more than an extension of their
          own Self. Losing a shadow familiar is exactly like losing a piece of
          one’s own soul - see Sorc page 146.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was held by the Black Sand Architects, a culture of ghosts
          who predeceased the Cult of the Empty Grave and are now typically
          considered part of their civilization. They taught it willingly to
          the Archive when asked.
        </p>

        <aside>
          <h4 id="familiar_or_friend">Familiar or Friend?</h4>
          <p>
            Familiars are a staple of fantasy literature and folk tales - a
            witch’s cat, a warlock’s imp, doing their bidding and helping them
            with magical rituals. In the Great Basin, of course, the Gift
            makes it impossible to bend sentient creatures to one’s will. When
            one sees an imp working with a Sovereign, that imp acts under
            duress, but not under some magical geas. When one of the
            Hearth-Kin walks by with a bird whispering secrets into their ear,
            that creature is their friend, not their servant.
          </p>
        </aside>
      </section>

      <section title="signature_ciphers" class="spell">
        <h3 id="signature_ciphers">Signature Ciphers</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Mystery</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Silent, sometimes Uncast</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> None</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          By using both your magical signature (Sorc page 96) and the
          signature of someone you know, you can encode a written message so
          that only the two of you can read it. Someone who knows both
          signatures
          <em>and</em> knows that this message is encoded with those two in
          particular can break the cipher. Otherwise, the message is nothing
          but a strange set of jumbled symbols laid atop one another -
          recognizable as a coded message to someone who knows this art, but
          unreadable. Psychometry used on the message can sometimes give hints
          as to who created it.
        </p>
        <p>
          Encoding or decoding a written message with a signature cipher takes
          a few seconds if there is cryptic or secretive flow available.
          However, it can also be done by hand, without magic, in about an
          hour per page.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art comes from an archaeological dig in the Worlds Beyond,
          beneath a city built on ever-older, ever-more-complex strata of
          technomagic. The Golden Ægis claim this place now, but the Archive’s
          explorations were there first.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="splinching" class="spell">
        <h3 id="splinching">Splinching</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> War 3+</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li><strong>Prerequisite arts:</strong> None</li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Connection, Loud</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Moderate</li>
          <li><strong>Common side effects:</strong> Chaotic flow</li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          Travel is the closest thing the Basin has ever discovered to safe
          long-range teleportation. Note the operative word “safe.” Splinching
          deploys one of the hundreds of not-so-safe methods against one’s
          enemy.
        </p>
        <p>
          When this Art inflicts lower-level Complications, it only removes
          small pieces or disorients someone. Higher-level Complications can
          leave someone halfway across the Basin, in one piece or in
          thousands.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art is less a “discovery” and more a byproduct of many
          unfortunate failures.
        </p>
      </section>

      <section title="stutter_stepping" class="spell">
        <h3 id="stutter_stepping">Stutter-stepping</h3>
        <ul>
          <li><strong>Nature:</strong> Mystery <em>or</em> Trickery</li>
          <li><strong>Type:</strong> Restricted</li>
          <li>
            Prerequisite arts: the Red Space <em>or</em> Spirit-walking
            <em>or</em> Transubstantiation
          </li>
          <li><strong>Descriptors:</strong> Loud</li>
          <li><strong>Flow:</strong> Small</li>
          <li>
            <strong>Common side effects:</strong> Chaotic flow, Emotional
            fatigue
          </li>
        </ul>
        <p>
          A primarily defensive technique, stutter-stepping phases one’s body
          intermittently through a different dimension or state of being.
          Attacks often pass through empty space where the body was less than
          a second ago. Stutter-stepping does allow its practitioners to pass
          through solid walls, but they are still somewhat vulnerable to
          poison gas or other environmental effects.
        </p>
        <p>
          All methods for stutter-stepping cary some degree of danger over the
          long term, so no one <em>lives</em> this way - at least, no one
          who’s healthy and sane.
        </p>
        <p>
          This art was found on a cache of materials retrieved from the Red
          Space. The Archive plumbed an entire square meter of Basin space
          where ancient statues pointed to a potentially lost or trapped
          object or entity. They finally drew forth many common items, among
          which was carpet scratched with this spell via a knife or other
          sharp implement.
        </p>
      </section>
    </section>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
