<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>Useful References</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Useful References" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="userful_references">Useful References</h1>

    <h2 id="connection">Mystic Connections</h2>
    <p>Every magical art with the Connection descriptor:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>Dream Travel</li>
      <li>Enchantment</li>
      <li>Entwined Objects</li>
      <li>Farspeech</li>
      <li>Healing</li>
      <li>Lagged Curses</li>
      <li>Mnemosurgery</li>
      <li>Nightmare_Exile</li>
      <li>Precognition</li>
      <li>Rapport</li>
      <li>Soul-work</li>
      <li>Splinching</li>
    </ul>
    <p>Arts that <em>benefit</em> from a mystic connection:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>Energy Waves</li>
      <li>Sixth Sense</li>
      <li>Travel</li>
      <li>the Uncountable Spinners</li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="loud_silent">Loud and Silent</h2>
    <h3>Loud arts:</h3>
    <ul>
      <li>Boundless Transformation</li>
      <li>Enchantment</li>
      <li>Energy Waves</li>
      <li>the Red Space</li>
      <li>Splinching</li>
      <li>Stutter-Stepping</li>
      <li>the Ten-Crore Stones</li>
      <li>Terror</li>
      <li>Travel</li>
    </ul>
    <h3>Silent arts:</h3>
    <ul>
      <li>Bonded Support</li>
      <li>Curses</li>
      <li>Dream Travel (usually)</li>
      <li>Guising</li>
      <li>Hyperfighting</li>
      <li>Hypnopraxis</li>
      <li>Lagged Curses</li>
      <li>Mental Acuity (usually)</li>
      <li>Personae</li>
      <li>Shadow Familiars (usually)</li>
      <li>the Shell Game</li>
      <li>the Shroud</li>
      <li>Signature Ciphers</li>
      <li>the Sixth Sense</li>
      <li>Spirit-Walking</li>
      <li>the Uncountable Spinners</li>
      <li>the Universal Repositories</li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="aspects">Aspects for the Arts</h2>
    <p>
      Almost every art needs a particular type of flow in order to work. In
      the Sorc corebook, we generally leave it up to the GM and players as to
      what aspects, emotions, or mindsets make sense, only noting a few
      oddballs (like life-flow not mattering for Healing). If you’d like a
      little more structure, here are a few Aspects for each of the game’s
      many Arts.
    </p>
    <p>
      In most cases, these aspects can come from outside the magus or from
      within. They also don’t need to be permanent emotional conditions: you
      can empty your mind to use Deconjuration, and in the heat of battle you
      will probably find the violent flow needed to cast an energy wave.
      Changing emotions regularly or staying in one mindset for a long period
      of time can trigger emotional side-effects, as mentioned for many of
      these arts.
    </p>
    <p>
      Consider this a partial list of possibilities, not a comprehensive set
      of rules or a set of absolute requirements. Be generous in interpreting
      different aspects. Go with what feels right to the character and their
      Tradition.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Aspect poisoning:</strong> Imbalance, poison, irony, tides
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Becoming:</strong> Becoming works with any aspect of flow,
        though it is faster when the available aspects match the changes to be
        made.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Bonded Support:</strong> Friendship, love, faith, secrecy,
        desperation
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Boundless Transformation:</strong> Surrender, planning,
        harmony - plus, of course, the aspect to be cloned.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>the Burning Dream:</strong> Fire, chaos, destruction,
        structure
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Cloning:</strong> Pairing, growth, reflection, envy, clay
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Conjuration:</strong> Any type that matches the object to be
        conjured. Examples:
        <ul>
          <li>
            For wine: a piece of grapevine, a memory of grape jam, another
            kind of wine, thirst
          </li>
          <li>
            For a tool: Work, precision, the material of which the tool is
            made
          </li>
          <li>For a mask: Cloth or ceramic as appropriate, deception, fun</li>
        </ul>
      </li>
      <li><strong>Curses:</strong> Anger, spite, cruelty, poison</li>
      <li><strong>Deconjuration:</strong> Void, empty-mind, hunger</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Distillation:</strong> Mental concentration and focus, wealth,
        structure
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Dream Travel:</strong> Dreams, escape, worry, adventure,
        courage
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Dreamshaping:</strong> Inspiration, desire, megalomania, play,
        treasure
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Enchantment:</strong> Friendship, braiding, protection,
        raising, plus whatever the original Expression would require.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Energy Waves:</strong> Violence, passion, focus, energy of the
        appropriate type, a damaged object
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Entwined Objects:</strong> Reflection, family, yearning, truth
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Expanded Expertise:</strong> Does not require flow. The act of
        acquiring Expanded Expertise might require all sorts of different
        flow, but it varies greatly by type, Path, and Fount.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Farspeech:</strong> Loneliness, friendship, concern, gossip
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Guising:</strong> Guising pulls exactly the aspects it needs
        from its surroundings. Trying to feed it something else breaks it.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Hallucination:</strong> Enjoyment, concealment, confusion,
        passion
      </li>
      <li><strong>Healing:</strong> Benevolence, kindness, well-wishing</li>
      <li><strong>Hyperfighting:</strong> Calm, focus, fury, panic</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Hypnopraxis:</strong> Persistence, obsession, restlessness
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Immortality:</strong> Immortality’s flow comes entirely from
        the mage’s own body and sense of self.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Judiciary Automata:</strong> Wisdom, rules, pedantry,
        information
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Knotwork:</strong> Preparedness, greed, pattern, rotation
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Lagged Curses:</strong> As per regular curses, plus:
        deviousness, patience, obsession
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Mental Acuity:</strong> Pattern, mathematics, artistry,
        puzzles. Mental acuity cannot take its flow from the mage themselves -
        they are already as smart as they will be without assistance.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Minuscule Servitors:</strong> As per Mystic Servitors, plus as
        small a thing (physical or emotional) as the caster can perceive or
        imagine.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Mnemosurgery:</strong> Precision, forgetfulness, preservation,
        impermanence
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Multitasking:</strong> Persistence, obsession, restlessness,
        or a myriad of flows woven together
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Mystic Servitors:</strong> Varies by type and intended
        purpose.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Nature-Work:</strong> The presence of natural environments (as
        opposed to things shaped by hand or by other magics) is a requisite
        for this sort of magic. Growing things are common, but decaying things
        are part of nature too.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Nightmare Exile:</strong> Indifference, ennui, spite, delirium
      </li>
      <li><strong>Null Tolerance:</strong> None</li>
      <li><strong>Oath-taking:</strong> Desire, trust, linkage, blood</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Personae:</strong> Reflection, masks, deception, play. These
        are only required when the persona is initially raised, not while it
        is active.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Physical Prowess:</strong> Solidity, flexibility, vigor,
        machinery, animal aspects. Physical prowess cannot take its flow from
        the mage themselves - they are already as strong as they will be
        without assistance.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Precognition:</strong> Time, bells, resonance, echoes</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Psychometry:</strong> Mist, dissection, clarity, trance states
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Psychotropics:</strong> Existing drugs and medicines, ecstatic
        states, aspects tied to the type of result that is desired.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Rapport:</strong> Love, compassion, togetherness, friendship,
        pairing
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>the Red Space:</strong> Concealment, hunger, misdirection
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Sea-work:</strong> The presence of large amounts of sea- and
        salt-flow and natural environments (as opposed to things shaped by
        hand or by other magics) is a requisite for this sort of magic.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Shadow Familiars:</strong> Darkness, trust, servitude</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Shapeshifting:</strong> Flow appropriate to the form attained.
        Because the flow must come from within the character’s body, the
        required emotional state reflects the character’s cultural metaphors
        (e.g. the turtle is a creature of determination for the Guild, but one
        of hesitation and fear for Diadem).
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>the Shell Game:</strong> Treachery, deception, craftiness. As
        mentioned in this Expression’s description, this cannot come from
        within the person running the game – it must be drawn from outside.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>the Shroud:</strong> Stealth, fear, audacity, silence, caution
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Signature Ciphers:</strong> Stealth, deception, mathematics,
        protection, confusion
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Sixth Sense:</strong> Introspection, alertness, lenses,
        concentration. Note that the Sixth Sense does not require any flow at
        all for nearby objects.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Soul-Work:</strong> Shadows, precision, artistry, compassion
      </li>
      <li><strong>Sovereignty:</strong> None</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Spirit-Walking:</strong> Varies by Tradition and Fount, as
        appropriate to their style of spirit-walking.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Splinching:</strong> Cruelty, division, destruction</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Stutter-stepping:</strong> As per the caster’s approach to
        Spirit-Walking or the Red Space, whichever they use as a prerequisite
        for this art.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tailored Canon:</strong> Craftiness, pedantry, artistry,
        selfishness
      </li>
      <li><strong>Telekinesis:</strong> Strength, focus, rage, wind</li>
      <li>
        <strong>the Ten Crore Stones of Death:</strong> Anger, bleakness,
        severity, devotion, arrogance, plus the aspect chosen to
        catastrophically augment.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Terror:</strong> Rage, cold, fear, despair, intimidation
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Transcendence:</strong> Flow appropriate to the new Earthly
        Form.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Transmutation:</strong> An appropriate flow for the
        <em>new</em> material.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>the Travel Lattice:</strong> Persistence, hustle, connection,
        yearning
      </li>
      <li><strong>True Speech:</strong> Communication, trust, intrigue</li>
      <li>
        <strong>the Uncountable Spinners of Silver Thread:</strong> Reverence,
        connection, permanence, cycles
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Universal Repositories:</strong> Learning, literature,
        curiosity
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Warding:</strong> Protection, caution, paranoia, durability
      </li>
      <li><strong>Weaponry:</strong> Danger, anger, determination</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Weather-working:</strong> Passion, water, wind, calm, artistry
      </li>
    </ul>
    <h3 id="emotional">Emotional Aspects in Objects</h3>
    <p>
      Emotionally-aspected flow doesn’t need to come from people. Objects can
      have imbued aspects (Sorc page 95) that provide emotional resonance. A
      set of ringing bowls long used for calming meditation will have that
      aspect imprinted on them. They can provide the calm necessary to
      activate Hyperfighting to any user, even if the caster’s culture makes
      no use of ringing bowls at all.
    </p>
    <p>
      Traditions that believe in inherent symbolism (those that access
      Alchemy, Earthpower, or Elementalism) can also provide emotional aspects
      from pure manifestations of certain materials or forces. An alchemist
      with a vial of mercury might tap it for its aspect of speed for Physical
      Prowess. An Earthpower adept might access the art of Belonging with an
      acorn, using aspects of growth and potential.
    </p>
    <p>
      It’s ok to invent these associations for your Tradition as you go along,
      but it’s also a good idea to write them down so that you don’t
      contradict yourself later.
    </p>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
