<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>Cultures</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Civilizations" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="civilizations" class="title">Civilizations</h1>
    <p>
      This century, at the end of the Interregnum, is a time of reconnection in the
      Great Basin. Cultures rediscover each other, sometimes finding that their
      neighbors are much changed from what they once were.
    </p>

    <p>
      Each civilization covers a wide territory, intercalated with other
      civilizations on the Basin and/or in other worlds. In game terms, this
      is represented by an <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> rating.
      Individual Returner cults might have an Infrastructure I rating, and most
      Societies have Infrastructure II, but most civilizations are large and
      organized enough to warrant Infrastructure III.
    </p>

    <p>
      The civilizations described below are far from the only ones in such a large
      world. Most of them are at great distances from one another, surrounded by
      Returner cults and Unruly Lands. Some even call other realms of existence
      their home. Your characters will have the chance to discover new civilizations
      and make the first steps towards trade, toward isolation... or toward war.
    </p>

    <p>
      There is substantial diversity within each civilization, including
      counter-culture groups and states that might want to secede. As a whole,
      however, a civilization is tied together by ideology. Its people not only live
      together, they share beliefs.
    </p>

    <p>
      These are represented in game terms by Core Values. Every member of a
      civilization has these Core Values at some non-zero rating. Losing these Core
      Values is much more an indication of having left the civilization than where
      you physically live.
    </p>

    <p>
      You will find the civilizations listed here in order by their proper name.
      Returner Cults and the Unruly Lands are at the end.
    </p>

    <aside title="Civilization Shorthands">
      <h3 id="civ_shorthands">Civilization Shorthands</h3>

      <p>
        If you’re running Sorc at a convention, or starting a new game and want to
        get up and running quickly, here are some ways to describe the gist of each
        civilization quickly. These are just broad strokes, and some are a little
        tongue-in-cheek, but they work well as a first introduction to what makes
        each group tick.
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="#cult_empty_grave">the Cult</a>: Everyone’s dead. You’re dead, your
          parents were dead, it works fine, you’re all necromancer ghosts.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#diadem">Diadem</a>: Ultra-rich merchant nobles, or their penniless
          underclass.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#geometers">the Guild</a>: The Basin’s best-educated, most
          influential, most hierarchical civilization.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#glimmermere">Glimmermere</a>: Everyone lives in a series of ever
          more fantastical dream worlds and creates magic with their artistic works.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#golden_aegis">the Ægis</a>: Your people built an actual factual
          stairway to heaven. When you found out it was empty you decided to become
          the gods and angels you never had.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#hearth_kin">the Hearth-kin</a>: Your ancestors left the Basin a
          long time ago. Now you’re back, and you live in a giant tree with your
          enormous family and their nature-spirit friends.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#nova_commonwealth">Nova</a>: Magic is totally awesome, especially
          the part you’re experimenting with.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#sovereigns_of_hell">the Sovereigns</a>: The demons kept your
          ancestors in terror for centuries. Now they answer to you, and you answer to
          no one.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#those_above_the_sky">Those Above the Sky</a>: Space-exploring
          safety-conscious libertarian flow merchants.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#unroyal">the Unroyal</a>: Imagine if the Fair Folk who live in
          dreams and spirit people away were an organized force for anti-tyranny.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#worldbuilders">the Worldbuilders</a>: Terraforming the Basin by
          pulling ancient cities into the present.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#unruly_lands">the Unruly Lands</a>: If you want to play someone
          from another fantasy setting, you can probably make them from here.
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="#returner_cults">Returners</a>: Magic was a gift and they would
          like to give it back, please. They live in Null Zones and also in denial.
        </li>
      </ul>
    </aside>

    <aside title="All Your Favorites Are Problematic">
      <h3 id="problematic">All Your Favorites Are Problematic</h3>

      <p>
        Every civilization in this book has issues. None of them are perfect. All of
        them do at least one good thing, and all of them do at least one bad thing.
        Some, in fact, do several awful things. They are written this way with
        intent.
      </p>
      <p>
        We hope that when you play you'll be driving to fix the issues that you see
        in these civilizations.
      </p>
      <p>
        Characters in Sorc are important to the story of the Basin. They are in a
        position to have real impact on the world. You can play Sorc as pure
        escapism, but it’s not inherently written that way. If you want to play
        without running into these issues, you’ll need to paper over substantial
        facets of each civilization. See the
        <a href="Advice.xhtml#using_the_civilizations">Advice chapter</a>
        for suggestions as to how to treat
        any civilization as an ally or an antagonist in your game.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <section class="civ" title="The Cult of the Empty Grave" epub:type="chapter">
      <h2 id="cult_empty_grave">The Cult of the Empty Grave</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>

      <p>
        Even before the Gift, the Great Basin was a place of magic and mystery.
        Supernatural creatures roamed the world, from dragons to doppelgangers, and
        ghosts haunted graveyards and broken-down houses alike. In one particular
        country, though, these ghosts were not feared, but respected and venerated.
        They were the spirits of beloved ancestors, and their families loved them in
        death as they had in life. In return, these ancestor-spirits taught and
        defended their descendants. Few became ghosts, but those who did were an
        integral part of life.
      </p>

      <p>
        When the Gift came, the greatest share of it came to mortals – not ghosts. The
        people were dismayed. How could this oversight have happened? And what would
        happen to the living once they passed on? Would they lose their power? How
        could such an imbalance be acceptable to Aion? Certainly this was a mistake,
        and the dead deserved the full measure of the Gift as much as anyone.
      </p>

      <p>
        Danger closed in from all sides as war began to consume the Basin. In order to
        survive the Interregnum and retain the wonder that had been given to them, the
        living enchanted the dead so that they could use magic as well.
      </p>

      <p>
        This was a spell of great cost. Magic was not well-understood, and the price
        was paid in millions of lives, none of whose spirits would ever return. To
        this day, that generation's absent ghosts are venerated beyond all others;
        their traditions and their lives used as templates for the present.
      </p>

      <p>
        Eventually all the mortals of this realm passed through the veil to the world
        of the dead. Because of the Great Enchantment, anyone who dies as a member of
        the Cult rises as a ghost, with the full magical powers of the Gift. Their
        magic sustains them. They will never fade into reincarnation unless they
        desire it. They even bear and raise ghostly children. There are no more living
        members of the Cult now, except for the occasional convert.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>

      <p>
        All in all, the Cult of the Empty Grave much prefers a spectral existence to
        one of flesh and blood. This commitment to afterlife-as-life pays off in
        spades when it comes to magical power in the Cult's territory. Nearly all flow
        there is death-aspected to some extent. This enhances their own power, and
        makes their lands very difficult for outsiders to invade, though it does have
        unfortunate side-effects on the local wildlife.
      </p>

      <p>
        Ghosts native to the Cult retain the skin tones that are common across the
        Basin, though undertones tend toward cool rather than warm, and birthmarks in
        emerald, sapphire, and amethyst replace the usual red, orange and yellow. A
        faint blue-white glow limns their outlines. Within their bodies are ghostly
        organs made of smoke and passion.
      </p>

      <p>
        The Cult is also home to many ancient ghosts from a civilization known as the
        Black Sand Architects, who harnessed the obsidian deserts to create a mighty
        empire over a thousand years ago. Their roads and statues can still be seen in
        many places across the Basin. They are ghosts of an entirely different kind,
        their faces always in shadow, their hair wild and smoky, their blood a vibrant
        orange light. This does not keep them from seeking the Cult's ideal of beauty
        (see below), but it does make them stand out.
      </p>

      <p>
        Cultists identify first and foremost with their nation and their history.
        Society and profession tend to be the next delimiters. Simply being dead does
        not make you family – but many ghosts nevertheless find the Empty Grave more
        welcoming than their original communities. The few newcomers who join the Cult
        while still alive are not really considered insiders until they die.
      </p>

      <h3>Life in the Cult</h3>

      <p>
        Many parts of the cult are nocturnal. People awaken in the evening as the sun
        goes down, feeling recharged by the light of the stars and the lengthening of
        shadows.
      </p>

      <p>
        Some children stay with their parents all day, but many are brought to play
        groups or tutors. Most Cultists effectively have government jobs, where they
        spend about a quarter of their waking hours working on projects as dictated by
        the Aged Council. The rest of their nights are spent on personal projects,
        with family, or in study of the Practice (the official state Tradition and
        religion).
      </p>

      <p>
        Individual Cultists do not use currency. The Cult’s custom of mutual
        compassion provides for most real <strong>needs</strong>. When one
        <strong>wants</strong>, perhaps for a work of art or rare services, one must
        wait patiently or trade favors. The Cult’s city-states use the
        <a href="Cultures.xhtml#economics">lakh-thaum</a>
        as their currency when dealing with outside
        civilizations, and trade extensively with Those Above the Sky to export death
        flow and import other varieties. There are no taxes; a Cultist’s regular labor
        on behalf of the Cult serves that purpose.
      </p>

      <p>
        The Cult’s settlements are frigtening to many outsiders. Buildings often
        resemble giant skulls or fragments of bone. Stranger cities are built entirely
        within an ancient whirlwind of black clouds, or beneath the reeds of a swamp.
      </p>

      <p>
        The Cult is ruled by a council of roughly a thousand of its most aged and
        experienced elders, all of whom are ghosts. While it is technically a
        theocracy, it functions more like a single-party democracy, where it is very
        difficult for newcomers to gain any influence at all.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects:</strong> Beauty, Calm, Compassion, Death, Knowledge,
        Rage, Respect, Sand, Stillness, Wind
      </p>

      <aside title="Flow in the Cult">
        <h3 id="cult_flow">Flow in the Cult</h3>

        <p>
          The lands that the Cult occupies produce death-aspected flow, which they
          find very useful for a multitude of necromantic purposes. It does not
          produce exclusively death-aspected flow, but it is quite pervasive, so any
          magical undertaking in these lands must either scrub the necromantic hue
          from its inputs or be satisfied with a somewhat more morbid output.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="What are ghosts?">
        <h3 id="ghosts">What are ghosts?</h3>

        <p>
          Ghosts are imprints of the living mind on the clay of the Basin's reality,
          to which the soul attaches itself after the death of the body. (Ghosts thus
          cast shadows.)
        </p>
        <p>
          You can have a ghost without a soul, but it doesn't linger long. Soulless
          ghosts tend to evaporate within a few days. If you are capable of working
          with the <a href="Magic.xhtml#uncountable_spinners">Uncountable Spinners</a>, you can snatch a soul at the
          moment of death so that any potential ghost won't receive it, and thus will
          fade away more quickly.
        </p>
        <p>
          Ghosts from different cultures appear differently. Sometimes they look
          exactly like mortals. More commonly, they appear spectral, washed-out, or
          with a single flat color. Sometimes they're blurry, lack legs, or appear
          vaporous. What you get when you cut into one is likewise culturally
          determined. There might be spectral flesh and bones and ink-black blood,
          there might be wisps of yellow fog, there might be howling voices yearning
          to devour the living.
        </p>
        <p>
          In the Cult of the Empty Grave, ghosts (i.e. most citizens) are faded but
          otherwise human-looking. Their interiors are still effectively flesh and
          bones. They eat ghostly food, they drink ghostly wine.
        </p>
        <p>
          Among the Sovereigns, who have a fair number of ghosts, they're monstrously
          beautiful reflections of one's “inner demons” and beliefs, and their insides
          are fire and gears. They subsist on emotion and clamour.
        </p>
        <p>
          If your culture has no notion of ghosts, then you live in a strange part of
          the Basin, because ghosts are a standard thing across the Basin and
          something is preventing them from appearing. Even
          <a href="Magic.xhtml#null_zones">Null Zone</a> have
          ghosts. <a href="Rules.xhtml#soul_repository">Soul repositories</a> can be used to keep them from
          persisting.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3>Spotlight: Beauty</h3>

      <p>
        In the years around the Gift, Duchess Wondrous Hematite was considered the
        most striking and beautiful person in the Cult. There are hundreds of
        portraits of her. Painters would travel for a thousand koss to capture her
        visage in a new setting. Only a handful are displayed in this age – the
        Duchess herself turned out to be a traitor to the cause, and her name rings in
        infamy.
      </p>

      <p>
        Instead, the portraits of her currently displayed are chosen because they
        contain, in the background, the same androgynous figure: M. Inked Sagacity,
        necromantic genius and long-time associate of the Duchess. Whereas Hematite
        opposed the Great Enchantment, Sagacity made it possible.
      </p>

      <p>
        Sagacity's unique face and form became the standard for beauty in the
        modern-day Cult. Women and men alike strive to emulate them. Self-magic
        enhances this: distinct masculine or feminine features are rare in the Cult.
        Men who are already born with more feminine features and women born more
        masculine often shift in order to emulate Sagacity more explicitly. Everybody
        agrees that no one can quite match them – but nearly everyone tries.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Compassion</h3>

      <p>
        The Cult of the Empty Grave has a double reputation. Those who know little
        about them see the Cult as an odd and potentially dangerous group of
        death-obsessed magi. It's difficult not to assume this, given their black-sand
        deserts, their rotting swamps, their bone-white ley lines. However, those who
        are closer to the Cult see a different side: the Cult is one of the most
        charitable organizations in the entire Basin.
      </p>

      <p>
        Access to flow, even to properly aspected flow, is considered a right in the
        Cult. This is easy for their citizens, but they make it possible for visitors
        and expatriates as well. Since carefully aspected flow is the basis of most of
        the Basin's economy, this means that the poorest of the poor in the Cult's
        territory lives quite a good life indeed.
      </p>

      <p>
        It's not just economic support, though. Cultists care about one another and
        about the right to exist as you want to exist. If you don't like what you are
        and want to change, they'll help. If you're cursed, they'll lift it. If you
        need to be healed, they'll find a way to do it. Death, from the Cult's
        viewpoint, was always intended to be a release from pain, and that should mean
        something.
      </p>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Shipments of bone and ivory</li>
        <li>Gloomy cities with gothic motifs</li>
        <li>Riddle contests that sharpen the Mystery-Nature</li>
        <li>Identical-looking citizens with similar faces and bodies</li>
        <li>Choruses of invisible voices that repeat benedictions upon travelers</li>
        <li>
          Obsidian monuments that stand in solemn recognition of those whose existence
          ended at death
        </li>
        <li>
          Rains of darkness that cleanse the land of warped and chaotic flow,
          returning it to its natural state
        </li>
        <li>
          Empty graves whose stones bear mystical inscriptions that funnel necromantic
          flow into the cult's ley lines
        </li>
        <li>
          Portals that allow those dead to step through and become as the living, and
          vice versa, until the sun next crosses the horizon
        </li>
        <li>
          Skeletons plant and prune vines whose grapes are made into wine the Cult
          sells to outsiders, who have visions of their own ancestors
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>

      <p>
        Children of the Cult are told, <strong>Hold To Your Traditions</strong>, for
        those who are older know better. Their ways are what saved us all from
        nonexistence during the Interregnum. Truly they were the greatest among us.
        Trust that seeking peace is right, that there is no fear to be had in death,
        that trust must be earned, and that The Practice (see below) is the path to
        enlightenment. When dealing with the Unruly Lands, the Cult espouses the
        methods of 400 years ago as the proper and respectable way to live. They do
        encourage the traditions of others, but primarily when they align with the
        Cult's own.
      </p>

      <p>
        The children are also told, <strong>Know Yourself</strong>. Know who you are,
        especially in the corners of your mind and your emotions. The Gift made it so
        that no one can take these things from you. Your mind is yours to grow and
        change as you see fit. It is the only tool that no one can take from you, and
        you should know it well.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>

      <p>
        The codified, cautious, systematic exploration of death-magic is known as
        <strong>The Practice</strong>. It follows the path of Language to the fount of
        Necromancy, and is the most commonly used magic in the Cult. With this they
        build their nations, unite their people, and investigate their world. A master
        of The Practice might:
      </p>

      <ul>
        <li>Whisper the words of the ancients, beseeching them for wisdom.</li>
        <li>
          Inlay runes in a sword made of narwhal tusk, that warn its wielder of
          hostile magic.
        </li>
        <li>Chant to call bone-and-obsidian buildings up from the ground.</li>
        <li>
          Carve a tale onto their own bones, using ivory scalpels that pass harmlessly
          through flesh, so that they can become more like the person in that tale.
        </li>
      </ul>

      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions:</strong> Cloning, Curses, Expanded Expertise
        (Archetypal or Polymath), Hypnopraxis, Multitasking, Null Tolerance,
        Psychometry, Soul-work, Transcendence, the Uncountable Spinners
      </p>

      <p>
        When the Practice is too slow and too weak, and existence is on the line,
        Cultists in dire need draw upon <strong>The Rage</strong>. While still a
        necromantic art, it follows the path of Belief rather than Language, using a
        Cultist's drives and passions to fuel more dangerous magic. This is most
        commonly tied to the Empty Grave's Respect your Traditions CV, with Cultists
        feeling anger and indignation at those who would sully their history, but it
        is also frequently connected with more personal CVs. Necromancers driven by
        The Rage have been known to:
      </p>

      <ul>
        <li>Call up dark fogs to hide in, with deceptive shapes moving inside.</li>
        <li>Raise a pure-white barrier of faith against which curses shatter.</li>
        <li>
          Stoke up one's vitriol and vomit forth waves of green flame to drive back
          invaders
        </li>
        <li>
          Demand in a thousand ways that a shattered building grow back into its
          original shape, and lo it does.
        </li>
      </ul>

      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions:</strong> the Burning Dream, Curses,
        Deconjuration, Hallucination, Nightmare Exile, the Ten-Crore Stones,
        Weather-work
      </p>

      <p>
        The Practice is the Cult's official tradition. The Rage is taught amongst
        secret societies and heretic splinter factions. Many people spontaneously
        discover it in moments of great need, making scholars wonder whether its roots
        are somehow secretly encoded in The Practice, or whether it was perhaps a
        side-effect of the Great Enchantment.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>

      <p>
        Two words, separated by a space. Close friends might shorten their names to
        just one of the two words.
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>History and time. Spun Hours, Proud Litany, Wise Tradition</li>
        <li>Compassion and charity. Kind Word, Surgeon's Heart, Warm Hand</li>
        <li>
          Beauty, often with light or darkness. Glorious Brightness, Shadow's Smile,
          Onyx Grace.
        </li>
      </ul>

      <p>
        Names in the Cult are sometimes chosen later in life as people discover facets
        of themselves. Someone born as Bright Eye might later take the name Flowering
        Compassion.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>

      <aside title="About Character Templates">

        <h4 id="char_temp">About Character Templates</h4>

        <p>
          At the end of each civilization writeup you’ll find a set of character
          templates. These are intended for the GM to use when they need a quick NPC
          from a particular civilization, so some statistics are omitted to cut down
          on space. They have no 4th CV, no Power or Import ratings, and no
          Approaches. The Expressions listed are the ones they’re most likely to use
          on a regular basis, so they might include Common Expressions. If you’d like
          to use these characters as the base for a full-fledged character you’ll need
          to do a little extra work.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <p>
        <strong>Architect</strong> <br />
        CVs: Hold To Your Traditions 3, Know Yourself 2, Mold Form to Function 3<br />
        <br />
        Natures: C2, I5, M3, S2, T2, W2<br />
        <br />
        Professions: Artist (Architect) 3, Theurge (Necromancy) 2, Prolocutor 1<br />
        <br />
        Tradition: The Practice [Cloning, Distillation, Hypnopraxis, Mental Acuity,
        Multitasking]
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Beautician</strong> <br />
        CVs: Hold To Your Traditions 2, Know Yourself 4, Make Things Beautiful 4<br />
        <br />
        Natures: C4, I2, M2, S3, T3, W2<br />
        <br />
        Professions: Artist (Beautician) 3, Prolocutor 2, Merchant 1<br />
        <br />
        Tradition: The Practice [Enchantment, Hallucination, Healing, Transcendence]
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Historian</strong> <br />
        CVs: Hold To Your Traditions 4, Know Yourself 2, Learn from the Past 4<br />
        <br />
        Natures: C5, I2, M5, S2, T3, W2<br />
        <br />
        Professions: Historian 3, Linguist 2, Scholar (Necromancy) 1<br />
        <br />
        Tradition: The Practice [Mental Acuity, Null Tolerance, Psychometry, Travel]
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Foreman of the Undead</strong> <br />
        CVs: Hold To Your Traditions 3, Know Yourself 3, Think Ahead 3<br />
        <br />
        Natures: C3, I5, M3, S3, T3, W4<br />
        <br />
        Professions: Magistrate 3, Theurge (Necromancy) 2, Athlete 1<br />
        <br />
        Tradition: The Practice [Cloning, Deconjuration, Multitasking, Mystic
        Servitors, Soul-work], The Rage [Curses, Energy Wave, Ten-Crore Stones]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="Diadem" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="diadem">Diadem</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        Diadem began as a trade alliance. Four nations, known historically as the Four
        Jewels of the Crown, worked together to ensure that their people had what they
        needed, and their rulers grew rich and powerful in the process. This alliance
        was sorely tested in the period after the Gift. For over two centuries one
        nation's interests were dominant over the others due to an imbalance of
        magical power and new trade goods. The other three nations were practically
        extinguished.
      </p>
      <p>
        Eventually the dominant nation “rediscovered” the art and customs of the other
        three cultures. Surviving members of those groups were invited to teach their
        ways and their history. The people of Diadem enjoyed this. In fact, they
        enjoyed it so much that they brought in storytellers and costume-makers from
        many of their distant vassal states, to enrich themselves with the customs of
        their allies. Entertainers and servants perform their arts at the invitation
        of Diadem's elect. The citizens of Diadem now talk about their “crown” being
        studded with the “jewels” of other cultures. Most of Diadem's cultural
        practices are now borrowed from other cultures, and eventually discarded when
        something new comes along.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        Diadem is an aristocratic republic. Only land-owners in the four central
        nations are considered full citizens. Those citizens choose eleven merchant
        families to wield power, based primarily on popularity and the wealth that
        they bring the citizens. These families make decisions for Diadem, but also
        sponsor “lesser” families, who obtain economic leverage over vassal states
        spread far and wide across the Basin.
      </p>
      <p>
        When Diadem accepts a vassal state, they agree to support their new allies in
        a variety of ways. Most of these are economical or military, but they also
        agree to take a multitude of pressures off those states, including any
        refugees who arrive from nearby Unruly Lands. Refugees are initially sent off
        to the central nations, where they live in neighborhoods together and learn
        Diadem's language and culture. None may become land-owners. Many form their
        own trade families and seek sponsorship from the ruling families, but only
        citizens may hold bank accounts, and fortunes must be kept in less secure
        forms.
      </p>
      <p>
        In return for their support, Diadem takes a large share of flow, the
        highest-quality reagents, and credit for discoveries made by vassal state
        citizens under their “patronage”.
      </p>

      <h3>Life in Diadem</h3>
      <p>
        For those in the merchant families, life often feels strenuous. Expectations
        are high. One must always be prepared for social maneuvering, simultaneously
        pleasant-mannered and on guard. The consequences of failure come late, and can
        be difficult to anticipate. One’s every move is part of a web that must be
        carefully considered – but quickly.
      </p>
      <p>
        Citizens of Diadem consider their family to be their primary allegiance.
        Within families, they are stratified by wealth – and thus often by age, as
        this civilization only recently rejected compound interest. Those who are most
        successful at trade and had longest to capitalize on their earnings are an
        elite group. Those who are younger or less successful may find themselves
        spending most of their time with non-citizens.
      </p>
      <p>
        Diadem’s underclass has things much worse. New arrivals are brought in from
        distant lands. They live away from their families. Those who have been in the
        central nations long enough are no longer in fashion, and must find new work,
        for flow is not a free resource in Diadem. The underclass are also taken as
        model citizens of their lands, and the upperclass treat their actions as
        representative of their whole nation. Most non-citizens consider themselves to
        be more part of their original culture and ethnicity than part of the Diadem.
      </p>
      <p>
        Marrying into a family doesn't change what people think of as “your” family,
        but it does change how your children are treated. This often leads to complex
        and uncomfortable relationships between parents and children.
      </p>
      <p>
        As mentioned, Diadem is an aristocratic republic. Only those born to a
        merchant family and recorded at birth may own land, and only current
        land-owners may vote. Diadem recognizes no diplomats from its vassal states.
        Merchants may ask for advice from “visitors” from those lands, but then again
        they may simply reject it.
      </p>
      <p><strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Connection, Dichotomy, Duty, Wealth</p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Wealth and Trade</h3>
      <p>
        Diadem is fantastically wealthy, rich even among major civilizations. Their
        homelands are naturally high in many varieties of flow, which they parlayed
        into territory and trade deals. This gives them substantial leverage when it
        comes to working with other groups. Most civilizations can't afford to ignore
        any one Diadem merchant house, let alone several of them acting together. Only
        Those Above the Sky rival them, and they're not as organized.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Unruly Lands don't participate in the aspect economy, but this doesn't
        keep them out of the Diadem's influence. Where the merchant houses couldn't
        buy territory, they sometimes hired mercenaries to take it by force. It was
        Diadem’s warlike nature that taught other lands to pull in their populations,
        to concentrate around the places they can defend and the things they care
        about, and forsake those parts of the world that are useless to them.
      </p>
      <p>
        These days, they'll say, those events are behind them. Diadem hasn't sent
        mercenaries into foreign lands in fifty years. Nevertheless, they still hire a
        great number of them, and they still gobble up new vassal states at a
        tremendous rate. They take their tribute not only in aspect-wealth but also in
        skilled and unique servants. The shadow of force can sometimes be just as
        effective as spears at the door.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most people who are sent as tribute to the merchant houses are themselves
        nobility back home, or something close to it. They're always skilled,
        intelligent, fascinating, or unusual in some way, often more than one. They're
        often unhappy about being sent, and their families aren't often happy about
        sending them, but what's the worse consequence: having your nephew live with
        the Diadem, safe and sound in their capital, for three years, or refusing the
        wishes of powerful people with ambition in their eyes?
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Children</h3>
      <p>
        Family is very important in Diadem. It's one of the things that initially
        draws in many of their vassal states. The major merchant families aren't just
        ruthless capitalists (though they are that), they're also loving parents – and
        grandparents, and great-grandparents, and great-great... well, let's just say
        that immortality hasn't slowed them down.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children are at the heart of a Diadem family. Across all classes, they are
        showered in love from the day they're born. They receive affection, attention,
        structure, education, time to play, and all the opportunities their parents
        and the Gift can give them. With multiple generations of child-raising
        experience all present in the household, no one slips through the cracks.
        Firstborn children aren't over-protected. Middle children aren't overlooked.
        The youngest aren't allowed to skip responsibilities.
      </p>
      <p>
        If there's a direction in which Diadem errs when raising their children, it's
        that “know your place” and “stay in your lane” are emphasized a bit too much
        for some people's taste. Rich children are told that they'll have to take
        responsibility for the business “some day”. (Whenever immortality makes that
        day...) Impoverished children are told that there will always be someone above
        them. Most people don't spot this aspect of Diadem right away, because
        children in many civilizations are seen as well-mannered if they “know their
        place”. Outsiders more often notice because those “manners” are part of
        adulthood here, too.
      </p>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Heavy use of makeup</li>
        <li>Carefully manicured parks</li>
        <li>Unusual costumes and jewelry</li>
        <li>Nearly every object is enchanted in some way</li>
        <li>Men carry pregnancies, with delivery via sorcery</li>
        <li>Refugee neighborhoods full of individuals from far away</li>
        <li>Ubiquitous magical servitors maintained by the underclass</li>
        <li>Eclectic cities with architecture from dozens of distant lands</li>
        <li>Groups of people each dressed in a different distinctive manner</li>
        <li>
          Ley lines beautifully enclosed in crystalline housings, with constant
          firework-like displays of light
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        The outside world knows that Diadem's inhabitants
        <strong>Embrace the Eclectic</strong>. They're neophiles. The stranger things
        are, the better they like them. In this land, wonders are built simply to have
        a world full of wonders, and if they don't all mesh together perfectly that's
        ok. Diadem’s artists synthesize influences from many cultures to create their
        works.
      </p>
      <p>
        Many outsiders don't realize that Diadem’s inhabitants are expected to
        <strong>Embrace Duty</strong>. This applies to everyone, from the citizens who
        owe their families their best efforts to the vassal-state residents who are
        expected to spend their time adding jewels to the crown.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        As is typical of their all-or-nothing approach, Diadem has two common
        Traditions. Most residents are comfortable with one of them and practice
        little to none of the other. The upperclass practice Transubstantiation, and
        the arts of the poor are called Drudgery.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Transubstantiation</strong> uses carefully gathered Reagents, mixed
        and burned, to evoke Oneiromancy. Diadem's mighty use this art to investigate
        what interests them and stay in touch over long distances; those less mighty
        often employ it in acts of entertainment. Transubstantiators have wielded
        their power in the following ways:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Burning exotic herbs whose fumes excite the mind</li>
        <li>Applying drops on the eyes to see the flows of magic</li>
        <li>
          Rubbing the skin with a blend of rare oils lets one slip into the walking
          dream
        </li>
        <li>
          Slowly growing beautiful and ephemeral houses from the most perfect of tiny
          shells from the oddest of beaches
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Dreamshaping, Expanded Expertise
        (Satori), Hallucination, Hypnopraxis, the Red Space, Transcendence,
        Transmutation
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Drudgery</strong> requires Discipline of the physical body. Through
        exercise and physical perfection one can use the powers of Elementalism to
        affect the physical world. This has built many of Diadem's cities, defended it
        in wartime, and shaped its underclass. A Drudge might use their power to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Invoke the power of stone, moving it or taking on its durability via lifting
          exercises
        </li>
        <li>
          Invoke wind's gusts or its seeking, cutting chill using breathing exercises
        </li>
        <li>
          Invoke water's fluidity or part lakes with slow, intricate flowing movements
        </li>
        <li>
          Invoke fire to burn, warm, or inspire using patterns of shouts and claps
        </li>
        <li>Invoke the shadow in perfect stillness, to hide or devour</li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Multitasking, Mystic
        Servitors, Nature-work, Tailored Canon, Telekinesis, Transmutation,
        Weather-work
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        Diadem names can be made using any of the other conventions listed here, or
        any other convention at all (on the assumption that somewhere there is an
        Unruly Land that names their children thus). Name changes are regular but
        infrequent, perhaps every twenty to thirty years.
      </p>
      <p>
        Gentlemen residents typically take names involving money, allies, or worldly
        power. Ladies more often take names about strength, intelligence, and concrete
        innate attributes. Non-binary peers most often take on names about ephemeral
        attributes, like grace, luck, or fate.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Merchant</strong> <br />
        CVs: Embrace the Eclectic 3, Embrace Duty 4, Profit for the House 5 <br />
        Natures: C5, I3, M3, S2, T5, W2 <br />
        Professions: Merchant 5, Prolocutor 3, Lawyer (Diadem) 2, Explorer 1
        <br />
        Tradition: Transubstantiation [Expanded Expertise (Satori), Red Space, Travel]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Entertainer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Embrace the Eclectic 4, Embrace Duty 2, Keep Face 3 <br />
        Natures: C3, I2, M3, S4, T3, W2 <br />
        Professions: Artist (Circus, Singer) 3, Prolocutor 2, Theurge (Elementalism) 1
        <br />
        Tradition: Drudgery [Energy Wave, Shapeshifting, Telekinesis, Transmutation]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Gardener</strong> <br />
        CVs: Embrace the Eclectic 3, Embrace Duty 3, Make the World Beautiful 3 <br />
        Natures: C3, I3, M2, S3, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Artist (Topiary) 3, Theurge (Earthpower) 2, Spy 1
        <br />
        Tradition: Drudgery [Cloning, Conjuration, Mystic Servitors, Nature-work]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Drudgery Sensei</strong> <br />
        CVs: Embrace the Eclectic 1, Embrace Duty 4, Pass the Lineage 5 <br />
        Natures: C3, I2, M4, S5, T2, W4 <br />
        Professions: Theurge (Elementalism) 4, Scholar (Elementalism) 4, Martial
        Artist 4, Teacher 3, Healer 2, Clergy 1 <br />
        Tradition: Drudgery [Enchantment, Expanded Expertise (Prodigy), Healer,
        Spirit-walking, Telekinesis]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="The Geometer's Guild" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="geometers">The Geometer's Guild</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        The Geometer's Guild was a mysterious assemblage of magi who ruled an entire
        continent. Though the sea foiled their attempts at further conquest, the
        members of this powerful society were the sovereigns of their realm, and all
        other people were their subjects. It was not a harsh rule, but still it was
        rule by might rather than by consensus.
      </p>
      <p>
        When the Gift was given, the ancient masters saw the writing on the wall at
        once. Rather than try to cling to power and be overthrown, they decided to
        share their wisdom with their citizens. They inducted every citizen into the
        Guild, expanding its rules and its rank ladder to accommodate millions of
        powerful but untrained new magicians. Naturally, neophytes were placed on the
        bottom rung. Knowledge can be leverage.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Guild became a well-oiled machine, pumping out hundreds of thousands of
        rigidly-educated geometers each year. They work in concert to enchant the
        lands, advance mathematical research, investigate new continents, and hunt
        down objects with rare and powerful aspects.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        The Guild is constantly engaged in outreach to the Unruly Lands. They seek to
        educate citizens there in a proper and rigorous approach to the magical arts.
        Many nations have abandoned their long-established Traditions to adopt the
        Sacred Geometry. Scholars come from all across the Basin, and indeed from
        multiple worlds of the Kaleidoscope, just to study at the feet of the
        Guildmasters.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Guild loves to categorize things, including people. They refer to
        Broadlanders from wide-open spaces like prairies and coastlines, Cloudeyes
        from the mountains, Tallfolk from the forests, Wavecarvers from the islands,
        and so forth. These categories are used less as expectations of behavior, and
        more as descriptions for skin color and origin. The Guild has an entirely
        separate categorization scheme based on tests of emotional reactions,
        shoddily-measured intelligence, and supposed criminal tendencies, which they
        believe to all be interrelated and very difficult to change after childhood.
      </p>

      <h3>Life Among the Geometers</h3>
      <p>
        Geometers wake to the tolling of the sunrise. Bells mark not only regular
        intervals (hours, days, months), but also special astronomical conjunctions
        and other times of power. Children attend gymnasium (school) from a young age,
        graduating at 30, when they are finally considered adults.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each city is circumscribed by pattern and rune, driving Travel lattice
        connections to the outer border or to a central transit nexus. Within the
        city, travel is by one’s own feet or wings, though some cities have gondolas
        for those who appreciate a rest and a view.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Guild uses an extensive system of bookkeeping for citizens’ monetary
        records. There are, of course, no coins, and everything is “on paper”. “Paper”
        in this case means interlinked memory crystals or the Universal Repositories.
        Maintaining this system is one of the largest sources of day-to-day work in
        the Guild.
      </p>
      <p>
        Though it has all the trappings of a meritocracy, the Guild is still rigidly
        hierarchical, ruled by those whom the masters made most powerful and
        influential. It is an oligarchy controlled by the leaders of the Guild's main
        branches: Deduction, Procurement, Education, Expansion, and Integrity.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Arrogance, Flow, Law, Learning, Loyalty,
        Order, Pattern, Pomp, Transmutation
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Social Clubs</h3>
      <p>
        Many practices in the Geometer's Guild are strictly gender-segregated, and
        have been since long before the Guild's presence was publicly known. Armies
        have men's battalions and women's battalions. Schools are taught by women, to
        women, or by men, to men. Even the instruction and support of sorcery conforms
        to this rule – men are expected to be more cautious and intellectual and are
        given greater technological support in Mystery and Communion, while women are
        better-supported in Industry and War as befits their expectations of strength
        and courage. (There is no game effect from this. If you want your character to
        hew to this standard, select your Natures appropriately; if not, you are
        simply an exception to the rule.) Children who do not strongly identify with
        one or the other are expected to eventually “choose a side”, and to use
        Self-magic to make it so. Many people wait until their twenties or thirties
        before finalizing their choice, but almost none change afterward.
      </p>
      <p>
        Nowhere is this divide more clear than in the Guild's social clubs. The vast
        majority of them are single-gender. Many are arranged around a particular
        purpose, from sports to games to politics to sorcery. Nearly all have a “rival
        society” – a women's kayaking club, for example, might hold races against a
        men's kayaking club from a neighboring prefecture.
      </p>
      <p>
        Loyalty to fellow club members and to one's gender is de rigeur. Lattice
        Travel keeps distant friends together through their club. Guild members mingle
        with one another at the lodge, discussing or participating in the club's
        activities. They flirt, court, and marry primarily within the same club. This
        leads most married couples to have a strong shared interest, which the Guild
        as a whole considers very healthy.
      </p>

      <h3 id="brightgarden">Spotlight: Law and Justice</h3>
      <p>
        The Guild hasn't just codified its magic and its education – it also has a
        codified set of laws and an extensive system of justice, judgment, and
        punishment. It is known as the Brightgarden Schema, for an ancient
        mythological figure of law and equality, Epitome of Brightgarden. It is
        implemented by the Guild's Branch of Integrity.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Brightgarden Schema began as a system designed to prevent infighting and
        settle disputes amongst the original Guild. It is very much a product of its
        time and its authors. Theft, murder, rape, and curses are explicitly called
        out as crimes, but guidelines are given to determine what is and is not a
        future criminal act. It allows dueling, but not vendettas. It demands
        restitution rather than incarceration or punishment. Periods of ostracism and
        shunning are occasionally prescribed, but there are few permanent punishments
        allowed. It treats all members as equals, with the exception of the Branch
        Chairs (the leaders of each Branch), who are given additional latitude and
        power. Members of the Branch of Integrity who are pursuing their duties are
        held to a different standard, but one that is also codified and strictly
        enforced.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Schema isn't perfect. There are certainly some areas where its age shows.
        However, it's the oldest law system that actually deals directly with magic,
        its abuses, and the loopholes that people might exploit in a mystical world.
        Thus, as with their magical tradition, the laws of the Guild have spread
        across much of the Basin and the Schema has been used as the basis and
        inspiration for legal systems in dozens of nations.
      </p>

      <aside title="Magical Notation">
        <h3 id="magic_notation">Magical Notation</h3>

        <p>
          The Guild's notation for the metaphysical has a precision and descriptive
          power unmatched among other systems. This has made it quite compelling for
          scholars all across the Basin as a common language for all mystical
          phenomena. With the size of the Guild and their scholarly influence, it's
          difficult to talk about magic without using at least some of their
          terminology. This is unfortunate, as some aspects of the Basin's metaphysics
          cannot be described by Guild notation.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="The Guild’s Units of Measure">
        <h3 id="units">The Guild’s Units of Measure</h3>

        <p>The <strong>koss</strong>, a unit of distance, equal to one millionth of the width of the Great Basin. 1 koss ≈ 2 miles ≈ 3 km.</p>
        <p>Shorter distances are measured in <strong>rods</strong>, each one ten-thousanth of a koss. 1 rod ≈ 1 foot ≈ 30 cm.</p>
        <p>Angles were once measured in suns, each being about half of a degree. In modern texts they are measured in <strong>radians</strong>.</p>
        <p>The <strong>grain</strong>, a small mass used for reagent measurement. 1 oz ≈ 30 gram ≈ 250 grains.</p>
        <p>Larger masses are <strong>grains-lakh</strong> (12kg, 25lb) or <strong>grains-crore</strong> (1.2 tons).</p>
        <p>The <strong>beat</strong> (as in heartbeat) is just under a second, making the beat-lakh one day and the beat-crore 100 days.</p>
        <p>The <strong>breath</strong>, the time it takes Aion to breathe once. 1 breath ≈ 7 years.</p>
        <p>The <strong>kalpa</strong>, 4.32 billion years.
        </p>
      </aside>



      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Public libraries</li>
        <li>Mystic architecture</li>
        <li>Roads laid out in holy geometric patterns</li>
        <li>Schools and gymnasiums for mystical training</li>
        <li>
          Hair, tattoos, and even veins that run in strict lines and perfect circles
        </li>
        <li>
          Carefully pruned and fractured ley lines that provide power to all citizens
        </li>
        <li>
          Burrowing construct-insects enchanted to carve a whole continent with runes
        </li>
        <li>
          Apprentices working in unison to create great mystical structures for their
          teachers
        </li>
        <li>
          Ziggurats, pyramids, obelisks, and other structures of stark form, often
          hovering over the center of a perfectly circular lake
        </li>
        <li>
          Transit centers where all the Lattice nodes from nearby lands have been
          combined into a single massive nexus, allowing the Guild to observe and
          measure Travel more easily
        </li>
      </ul>


      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        Understanding geometry and logic requires one to prioritize
        <strong>Order Above All</strong>. The universe has order to it, though it
        may be complex. Society must have order too, so that it does not fall into
        chaos.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Guild's mystic origins are still an important part of it today. The
        ultimate goal of geometry is to free oneself from the realm of the flesh and
        enter the realm of matter, of energy, perhaps even of pure thought. Any
        barriers within the self are to be overcome. From neophyte to master, all
        are told, <strong>Transcend Your Limits</strong>.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        The Guild's one and only tradition is <strong>Sacred Geometry</strong>,
        which uses Geometry to engage in Alchemy. Its effects can be seen all over
        the lands, from too-straight roads and trading arcs to complex
        three-dimensional pathways in river dams and deep mines. All citizens use it
        to ward themselves and their houses, and to provide for themselves without
        the need for farms or labor. The Guild's masters commonly:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Design fields in shapes that both maximize crop yield and condense flow
          from the air
        </li>
        <li>
          Build fractal-edged tools with which to tow Travel lattice points into new
          positions
        </li>
        <li>
          Inscribe patterns on lenses with which to analyze the world more closely
        </li>
        <li>
          Use memorized and repeated mantra-proofs to open Travel gates or to
          Shadow-Walk
        </li>
        <li>
          Trade complex knotted bracelets with friends, allowing them to maintain
          Rapport at great distances
        </li>
        <li>
          Construct automata with mathematical inscriptions that can link together
          in different ways for a variety of effects
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Enhanced Expertise (Satori),
        Knotwork, Psychometry, the Red Space, Telekinesis, Travel, Universal
        Repositories, Warding.
      </p>
      <p>
        Other traditions are learned here only by members of outside societies, or
        as passed down through family lines from immigrants. As immigration is
        carefully controlled, this is fairly rare.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        Names are habit-nouns of a word or two, but are given “of” a location. When
        they introduce themselves to those from more distant locales, the “of”
        becomes more specific. (e.g. “... of Seventh Street of the City of Flowers
        of the Fifth Guild”)
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Men typically have names of obedience, propriety, wisdom, or hierarchy.
          Prudence of High Canal. Ascendency of the First City. Duty of Eighteenth
          Boulevard. Justice of Blue Hamlet Eight.
        </li>
        <li>
          Women typically have names involving becoming, movement, building, or
          change. Revision of the Yellow House. Arrival of Mirth Cavern. Ascension
          of Broken Circle. Commencement of Club Avenue.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        Names in the Guild rarely change unless someone lives in a new place for
        over a decade. If someone does decide that they'd rather be called by
        another name, it rarely sticks. Most people would rather appreciate an
        ironic name than have to learn a new one.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Mathematician</strong> <br />
        CVs: Order Above All 4, Transcend Your Limits 1, Work Toward Unity 3 <br />
        Natures: C2, I3, M5, S2, T3, W2 <br />
        Professions: Theurge (Alchemy) 4, Scholar (Alchemy) 4, Mathematician 4,
        Teacher 3, Linguist 2, Lawyer (Guild) 1 <br />
        Tradition: Sacred Geometry [Enhanced Expertise (Prodigy), Knotwork,
        Hypnopraxis, Mental Acuity, Red Space, Warding]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Magistrate</strong> <br />
        CVs: Order Above All 5, Transcend Your Limits 2, Privilege is a Poison 3
        <br />
        Natures: C3, I3, M5, S3, T3, W4 <br />
        Professions: Magistrate 3, Lawyer (Guild) 2, Explorer 1 <br />
        Tradition: Sacred Geometry [Curses, Farspeech, Psychometry, Travel, Warding]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Healer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Order Above All 2, Transcend Your Limits 3, Help the Needy 4 <br />
        Natures: C5, I2, M3, S4, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Healer 3, Teacher 2, Samaritan 1 <br />
        Tradition: Sacred Geometry [Enchantment, Healing, Knotwork, Warding]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Social Club Officer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Order Above All 3, Transcend Your Limits 4, Make Friends 3 <br />
        Natures: C4, I3, M2, S4, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Politician 3, Samaritan 2, Courtesan 1 <br />
        Tradition: Sacred Geometry [Dreamshaping, Dream Travel, Farspeech, Travel]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="Glimmermere" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="glimmermere">Glimmermere</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        The original Glimmermere was an artist's collective, on the shore of a lake.
        Its residents were painters, potters, poets, and craftspeople. On the day of
        the Gift they were gathered on the mural in their great meeting-hall. They
        felt the power take hold of them, each of them coming to a personal epiphany
        before joining together in communal Rapport. It was a powerful feeling that
        the original members of the collective would think back to even centuries
        later.
      </p>
      <p>
        For some time the residents of Glimmermere continued on in the Basin,
        learning and growing together, improving their art. Then things became too
        dangerous for them. They were thinkers and artists, not soldiers. Rather
        than stay and risk their lives, they slipped quietly through that very same
        mural and beyond the world, into the Dream Realm known as Sunset-Over-Sea.
        Once they had their feet under them, they painted and sculpted the world
        around them to suit their liking. Most find it much more likeable than they
        did the Basin.
      </p>
      <p>
        Over the centuries they've gathered other talented artists to them. Some
        were like-minded, and stayed. Some were not, and went their own way.
      </p>
      <p>
        As each artisan created further masterpieces, they opened up pathways to new
        Dream Realms. Sometimes an enclave of citizens would step through to that
        world, and Glimmermere spread across hundreds of worlds. It may not be the
        largest civilization, but it's almost certainly the most widespread.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        Most citizens of Glimmermere left the Great Basin behind forever, but some
        still return from time to time. Many are wistful wanderers, looking for
        friendship or inspiration. These explorers are often ill-prepared, thinking
        their magical talent and full-body mystical tattoos alone sufficient for the
        task. Older residents travel better provisioned. Their garments are covered
        with artwork, all of it mystically active. Patterns and hues in their
        clothing change at their command – some might calm minds and heal hearts,
        others might shunt violence into the Dream Realms. Their hair is woven in
        ways that map the Travel lattice. People who've only met Glimmermere's
        dreamers are surprised to see someone thus outfitted, but being an artist
        requires planning as well as improvisation.
      </p>
      <p>
        Bodies in Glimmermere, though certainly striking, are typically conventional
        in their structure. Many people paint or sculpt themselves into new forms,
        but in general the residents prefer to create avant-garde takes on
        conventional bodies rather than living as something “nonsensical”.
      </p>
      <p>
        The residents of Glimmermere identify strongly with the notion-lands they
        grew up in. Landscape painting is a common art, and everyone knows where
        you're from by the character of your work. Residents from the lofty realm of
        ideals paint cirrus clouds, white-capped mountains, and deep-blue oceans.
        Hermits from the desolate deserts of no-mind are minimalists, while those
        who run the labyrinths of twisted thought imbue their work with false detail
        that fades away the closer you get to it. All of these are stereotypes, but
        they bear some truth as well. Many residents of Glimmermere imagine that
        natives of the corresponding lands in the Basin must have chosen them
        because of their conceptual resonances, consciously or subconsciously.
      </p>

      <h3>Life in Glimmermere</h3>
      <p>
        Glimmermere’s city-states are small compared to those in the Basin. Few are
        larger than ten thousand. Some are just a few dozen individuals. Each has
        its own unique style – cuisines brought from a different worlds, pastels or
        oils or watercolor making the sky, clothing in a riot of fads and styles.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children in Glimmermere grow up with magic, in ever-changing worlds. They
        are taught the Higher Talent from the moment they can sing or finger-paint,
        and rare is the teenager who does not discover the Mad Power for themselves.
        Parents teach their children to control and choose, or to ride their
        intuitions and take the consequences as they come.
      </p>
      <p>
        Because most of Glimmermere lives in the Dream Realms, their dwellings are
        what they wish them to be. Each person creates their own dwelling and
        unfurls it for others, and it is considered quite rude to shape someone
        else’s dwelling without permission.
      </p>
      <p>
        Glimmermere is an adhocracy. They hate to admit ever needing rulership. On
        the rare moments when decisions must be made, those who are closest to the
        decision point simply do what they think is best, whether that involves
        consulting with others or deciding things themselves.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Argument, Art, Chaos, Choice, Creativity,
        Devotion, Drama, Dream, Flowers, Genius, Growth, Love, Madness, Passion,
        Pattern
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Drama</h3>
      <p>
        Glimmermere loves drama. There's a place and a time for it, and that time,
        in addition to on the stage, is during a romantic relationship.
      </p>
      <p>
        Residents of Glimmermere believe that romance should be storybook. It should
        be a tumultuous affair, a driving need, something to shake the foundations
        of the world and leave you breathless. It doesn't matter who you love –
        indeed, forbidden love can be the most romantic, though taboos on age
        remain. What matters is that you love strongly and freely and without
        restraint.
      </p>
      <p>
        Visitors to Glimmermere sometimes find themselves caught up in this if they
        catch someone's eye, or if someone considers them a potential rival.
        Fortunately, most affairs are short, and children are rare. The lasting
        consequences are more emotional than physical. There's an understanding, at
        least among the locals, that the consequences of romance should remain
        within that arena and not spill out into the rest of life.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Growing and Flowering</h3>
      <p>
        On the opposite end of the see-saw from Glimmermere's drama obsession is
        their desire for wisdom. Life experiences are not merely to be felt, but to
        be learned from, internalized, and turns into inspiration.
      </p>
      <p>
        The reality of immortality has shifted the narrative that wisdom belongs
        only to the old. Many Glimmermere residents take on a more cyclic approach.
        Each part of their life (social, creative, family, etc.) is in either what
        some call a “growing” phase or in a “flowering” phase. Those who are growing
        make mistakes to learn from – they live lives of drama, chaos, and great
        activity. Those who are in a “flowering” phase have the wisdom of their
        experiences, and are able to share that with others. Someone might say that
        they're growing as an artist but flowering as a parent, for example.
      </p>
      <p>
        It should be noted that Glimmermere's residents are just as bad at accepting
        advice as they are good at giving it. Even someone who admits they're in a
        growing phase might not be willing to hear from someone who's flowering.
      </p>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>A focus on form over function</li>
        <li>Works of art in the process of creating themselves</li>
        <li>Ornate cities raised in a weekend and razed a week later</li>
        <li>Strange landscapes appearing and disappearing in the sky</li>
        <li>Custom-drawn constellations to enhance astrological powers</li>
        <li>Children learning magic earlier than in any other civilization</li>
        <li>Statues performing plays and arias to accumulate stores of flow</li>
        <li>
          Bodies dreamed into beautiful symmetry or some fascinating, new,
          unheard-of form
        </li>
        <li>
          A trail of exhibition halls across a dozen Dream Realms, each with a
          painting that leads to the next
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        Whatever else you do, you must <strong>Live your Truth</strong>. Do not
        conceal who or what you are, and don't let others convince you to hide it
        either. It's ok to play pretend, or to be an actor. It's not ok to stuff
        down what you are just to make someone else happy.
      </p>
      <p>
        However, you are not the only being in this world.
        <strong>Carry the Thread</strong>. Bring the work of others into your own,
        call back to what has been done before, make the meaning of others clear in
        your own work. Isolation is a weakness in art.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        Art on its own can feel magical. <strong>The Higher Talent</strong> is art
        as true magic, using symbolism and metaphor to craft magical effects from
        artistic works and techniques. The Higher Talent follows Artistry to
        Oneiromancy. Each resident of Glimmermere has their own particular artistic
        focus, and so dozens of variants on The Higher Talent are taught by masters
        of the various arts. Painting, sculpture, poetry – all manner of artistic
        endeavor apply. Virtuosos have applied the Higher Talent to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Sketch their friends and speak to them at great distances</li>
        <li>Hand-sculpt an object out of the air itself</li>
        <li>Whisper a few unfinished lines of haiku and fade from awareness</li>
        <li>
          Play a complex song of interleaving rhythms that opens a pathway to
          another world
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Dream Travel,
        Dreamshaping, Hypnopraxis, Shapeshifting, Spirit-Walking, Transcendence.
      </p>
      <p>
        Sometimes art is too slow or too easily misinterpreted. Sometimes you just
        need power. <strong>The Mad Power</strong> follows the path of Wild Magic to
        Glory, and it's associated with many a legendary rescue or tantrum. If the
        Higher Talent is a carefully planned and executed portrait, the Mad Power
        angrily tears the canvas and hurls paint. Divas have used the Mad Power to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Fragment into hundreds of multicolored prism-selves that fight like an
          army
        </li>
        <li>Scarify the soul with patterns both beautiful and terrible</li>
        <li>
          Douse themselves in mud and break out of the hardened shell stronger and
          tougher than before
        </li>
        <li>
          Smash together collected knots of discordant flow and scream loud enough
          to shatter a building
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Curses, Energy Waves, Mystic
        Servitors, Nightmare Exile, Shapeshifting, the Ten Crore Stones,
        Transcendence
      </p>
      <p>
        Most inhabitants of Glimmermere know both traditions but are hesitant to
        call on The Mad Power. It locks one into a vengeful mindset too easily, they
        say. Still, there is no taboo against learning it, only against using it too
        often.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        Flowery descriptions, shortened in conversational use. Some use colors and
        shapes with emotions: Bold Burgundy Arc of Completion (Arc). Excitement's
        Bright Green Spire (Spire). Building the Nonsense Notion of Blue (Blue).
        Others make reference to their present form: Unreasonable Beauty of the
        Umber Eyes (Beauty). Last Gleam of the Cerulean Skin (Gleam). Long-legs the
        Stilt Walker (Legs).
      </p>
      <p>
        Names change with forms in Glimmermere. Someone who makes a long-term shift
        from a human shape to a draconic shape would likely take on a new name,
        regardless of whether it's a reference to their form or not.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Musician</strong> <br />
        CVs: Live your Truth 3, Carry the Thread 4, Bridge Social Divides 2 <br />
        Natures: C4, I2, M2, S3, T3, W2 <br />
        Professions: Artist (Singing, Lute) 3, Prolocutor 2, Linguist 1
        <br />
        Tradition: The Higher Talent [Common arts]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Sky-painter</strong> <br />
        CVs: Live your Truth 4, Carry the Thread 1, Shock and Awe 3 <br />
        Natures: C4, I4, M3, S3, T3, W3 <br />
        Professions: Artist (Weather, Painting) 3, Explorer 2, Soldier 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Higher Talent [Dream Travel, Spirit-walking, Transcendence,
        Weather-work], The Mad Power [Dream-shaping, Energy Waves, Weather-work]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Sex Worker</strong> <br />
        CVs: Live your Truth 4, Carry the Thread 3, Fair Trade 3 <br />
        Natures: C4, I3, M3, S4, T3, W3 <br />
        Professions: Courtesan 3, Theurge (Oneiromancy) 2, Healer 1
        <br />
        Tradition: The Higher Talent [Dream Travel, Dream-shaping, Hypnopraxis,
        Mystic Servitors, Rapport], The Mad Power [Curses, Nightmare Exile,
        Shapeshifting]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Body Sculptor</strong> <br />
        CVs: Live your Truth 4, Carry the Thread 3, Measure Twice Cut Once 2 <br />
        Natures: C4, I4, M2, S2, T2, W3 <br />
        Professions: Artist (Body art, Sculpting) 3, Merchant 2, Courtesan 1
        <br />
        Tradition: The Higher Talent [Enchantment, Healing, Shapeshifting]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="The Golden Aegis" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="golden_aegis">The Golden Ægis</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>Not every religion is true.</p>
      <p>
        The Church of the Shield ruled an archipelago that stretched for nearly a
        thousand koss. They built towers of shining black rock to exalt the virtues of
        their gods, and the angels who came invisibly to protect believers and
        non-believers alike. When they received the Gift, they built those towers
        taller still, and capped them with portals to the Worlds Beyond. The church
        had long known of these distant realms, but now that there was a chance of
        actually reaching them, the congregations rushed to meet their gods. They knew
        of the chaos that was spreading across the world. Surely, with their own might
        added to that of the angels, the world could be brought to a joyous peace.
      </p>
      <p>
        Though they reached the Worlds Beyond, they never found their gods – or anyone
        who had ever heard of them. Their religion had been a lie all along. It was...
        disappointing.
      </p>
      <p>
        While the church crumbled, faith remained. Some of the largest congregations
        came together and made a pact amongst themselves, reinforced by magic. If
        their gods did not exist, then by all that was holy, they should.
      </p>
      <p>
        These people became “Shieldbearers” of the Golden Ægis: would-be protectors of
        the Basin. They are the angels and gods that their people needed. They live in
        flow-rich Worlds Beyond and along ley lines in the Basin, using the excess
        power to bind themselves together in a civilization-wide connection called the
        <a href="#overmind">Overmind</a>.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        After their transformation, the Ægis consider themselves to be of two peoples:
        the armored, glowing-winged angels that are seen more often in the basin, and
        the wild profusion of strange god-forms that are more often seen in the Worlds
        Beyond. Angels rarely identify with the forms they used to have, but they do
        remember them, and sometimes use that to seek common ground with the folk of
        the Basin. There is a certain amount of “we have evolved beyond...” rhetoric
        that creeps into this, which few people appreciate.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Ægis’ primary goal is to be the light, the inspiration, and the cavalry
        for people in trouble across the Basin. Different groups of Sheildbearers
        approach this goal differently. Some lean more toward education and
        inspiration; others lean more toward physical intervention. Some prefer to let
        local groups determine their own paths, while others insist that they know
        best. The presence of the Overmind helps to keep groups from straying too far
        into extremism.
      </p>
      <p>
        The ancestral homeland of the Church of the Shield serves as a rallying point,
        but the real home of the Ægis is now in the Worlds Beyond. Travel takes them
        to and from their heavens. This makes them one of the most widespread groups
        within the Basin, as they explore its entire diameter to find those in need.
        It’s not uncommon for Shieldbearers to operate alone. Many fly hundreds of
        koss in a day, escaping to heaven if danger becomes overwhelming.
      </p>

      <aside title="The Overmind">
        <h3 id="overmind">The Overmind</h3>

        <p>
          The Overmind is a mystic connection between all members of the Ægis, sending
          comfort and emotional strength to one another. It is a single magical
          entity, a living Dream Realm, that connects all Shieldbearers in unity and
          fellowship.
        </p>
        <p>
          Much as with Rapport, the amount one decides to share with the Overmind is
          up to the individual. Most Shieldbearers share quite a bit. It is through
          the Overmind that Shieldbearers measure themselves and each other, dreaming
          of one another's thoughts and deeds, recognizing the inherent worth of each
          person and what they have done.
        </p>
        <p>
          Disconnecting from the Overmind, or failing to share enough with it, is
          considered suspicious behavior. Shieldbearers are allowed a certain amount
          of privacy, but the thought of living an unobserved life is foreign to them.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3>Life Among the Ægis</h3>
      <p>
        In the Basin, Shieldbearers live alone or in small conclaves. They rarely
        establish the city-states one sees among other civilizations. Many are
        self-sufficient, but others trade with locals for mutual benefit. Some few
        (heretics) set themselves up as figures to be worshipped, taking advantage of
        groups with less understanding of the world.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children are almost never raised in the Basin. Instead, most parents bring
        their families back to heaven, to live and grow in the larger community of
        their people. Many parents use servitors conjured with the Self-nature to
        watch their children if they must be away.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Ægis is a very hierarchical timocracy, ruled by those who are
        instinctively seen to have the greatest honor. Honor in the Ægis is achieved
        by upholding the civilization's Core Values in word and deed. The Overmind
        records and esteems their acts. Wishing to rule is considered dishonorable;
        thus it is that several of the Ægis' highest-ranking officials are all but
        forced to continue with their positions. Some would do almost anything to be
        replaced, but cannot bring themselves to sacrifice their own honor – yet.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Beauty, Benevolence, Conflict, Focus, Honor,
        Respect, Surveillance, Suspicion, Union, Valor
      </p>

      <aside title="The Heavens">
        <h3 id="aegis_heavens">The Heavens</h3>

        <p>
Some twenty and more of the Worlds Beyond have been converted
          into heavens by the Ægis. Their “gods” begin with an empty or blasted place
          and build the places spoken of in their traditions: vaulted halls, prismatic
          sunsets, clear-flowing water, columns that support the sky itself. Vast
          megalopoli, much larger than the city-states of the Basin, serve as homes to
          the Ægis’ people.
        </p>
        <p>
          Each heaven has eight secret names by which it is commanded and changed, but
          colloquially they are referred to by their most notable building material:
          the Marble Heaven, the Diamond Heaven, the Bismuth Heaven, and so forth.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <h3>Spotlight: Focus</h3>
      <p>
        Shieldbearers are expected to concentrate on their duties when in the field.
        When off-duty, they can pursue their own interests and hobbies, or even simply
        relax. When on-duty, their minds should be on the important work of bringing
        justice to the world. This focus requires the Shieldbearers to know
        themselves. To act for the greater good rather than for selfish causes, they
        must know their own reactions and goals.
      </p>
      <p>
        Some time after their ascension to the Vessel of Heaven, the Ægis decided that
        the custom of gender and the stereotypes attached to sexuality clouded the
        knowledge of the self. They believe now that freedom from these constructs
        allows them to see their own selves without the stereotypes and potential
        confusion that gender can bring. Shieldbearers present themselves without
        gender and without sexual characteristics. Those who are old enough to have
        been there when the Ægis began used Self-magic to remove their sexual
        characteristics.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children in the Ægis are born of a union between two or more Shieldbearers,
        each contributing a portion of their magical signature. Most begin as infants,
        but some (especially in times of duress) spring full-grown into existence. All
        are born sexless. Those who embrace sex or gender later in their lives are
        seen with some degree of uncertainty by their fellows – do they really know
        themselves well enough to say that they belong in these categories, or have
        they simply left the path to fit in with other civilizations?
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Humility and Respect</h3>
      <p>
        When they chose to emulate holy beings, the Ægis did not merely seek power.
        They wanted to become the angels of their stories: honorable, humble,
        respectful, and dutiful.
      </p>
      <p>
        A proper Shieldbearer does not boast of their own deeds. They do not place
        themselves in positions of political influence or use their reputation to
        funnel flow or change policies. They tend to their duties and to the wellbeing
        of others – and occasionally to their own wellbeing, for a sick doctor can
        unintentionally harm thousands. They are equally unmoved by threats and
        bribery.
      </p>
      <p>
        A proper Shieldbearer also uses humor to disarm anxiety, meets anger with
        compassion, and sheds insults like a duck sheds rain. They act based not on
        the positions of others, but on their merits. They seek to bring others not
        only to physical wellbeing, but to mental and emotional health as well.
      </p>
      <p>
        It's not easy to be a proper Shieldbearer. Most lean heavily toward one
        particular set of virtues, and that is considered normal. After all, striving
        is a virtue as well, and that could not be true if perfection were expected of
        everyone.
      </p>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Open plazas with prismatic bismuth ornaments</li>
        <li>Muscular humanoid bodies with animal heads</li>
        <li>Speaking with friends far-off through the Overmind</li>
        <li>Hosannas and bells played by invisible magical servants</li>
        <li>Children being taught of far-off lands and their cultures</li>
        <li>Symbols of the Ægis' gods tattooed or branded in strategic locations</li>
        <li>
          Island retreats for those times when Shieldbearers must relax and recuperate
        </li>
        <li>
          Many-armed armor of dark gold with wings of blue light, summoned from beyond
        </li>
        <li>
          Pools of blue energy that collect the most intense of beliefs and passions,
          to fuel later magical endeavors
        </li>
        <li>
          Meditation circles separated by entire worlds, using Rapport to keep their
          fellows in regular communication with one another
        </li>
        <li>
          The Resonance of Control, a civilization-wide aspecting of flow that helps
          people regulate their emotions and maintain calm in the face of stress or
          danger
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        Each member of the Ægis is expected to <strong>Answer the Call</strong>. This
        begins with duty to their civilization and spreading its words. Wherever they
        go, they carry offerings of peace, justice, and understanding to those who are
        ready to receive them. For those who are not, they have stern words, and
        sterner actions if need be. A Shieldbearer must also act when someone requests
        their aid. If they hear of injustice in a far-off land, if someone speaks of
        being tortured or assaulted, citizens of the Ægis take those things seriously.
        They do not necessarily go flying off immediately, but neither do they let the
        matter pass.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Ægis also remembers their foundation as a religion, one based on service
        to higher powers. In the end, it was the service that mattered. They – in
        fact, <strong>anyone</strong> – can become that higher power. If everyone is
        potentially divine, it is imperative that they be heard.
        <strong>Raise Every Voice</strong>, say the Shieldbearers, and let every call
        for justice be heard.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        In learning <strong>The Calling</strong>, Shieldbearers follow the path of
        Belief to the fount of Glory. It is typically tied to one of the Ægis' two
        Core Values, but is sometimes tied to a personal CV instead. The “gods” of the
        Ægis use this art to direct their angels, build new realms of Heaven, and
        continue to transform into impossible creatures of spirit. They rely on their
        angels to protect them as they plumb the depths of the multiverse. In return,
        these “gods” act as the patrons who empower others with the Aura of Heaven
        (below). The angels of the Ægis have been known to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Unlock the Travel lattice with the urgency of their need</li>
        <li>Heal with the belief that no one should have to suffer</li>
        <li>
          Coerce a ley line into shifting with the studied conviction of a hundred
          souls
        </li>
        <li>
          Project their love for their allies into a glowing shield that grows
          stronger the more it is tested
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Healing, Knotwork,
        Spirit-Walking, Transcendence, Travel, Warding
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Aura of Heaven</strong> is the power of Arete, bestowed on angels
        by their distant Patrons. It is the source of their holy armors, their dashing
        flight, their beneficent healing touch. All of the more direct and
        interpersonal of the Ægis' magical Expressions are all part of the Aura, to
        better facilitate their work in the Basin. The gods of the Ægis have granted
        the power to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Call on The All-Benevolent Eye to reveal secrets and danger</li>
        <li>
          Learn the secrets hidden in ancient tomes from the whispers of The Eternal
          Librarian
        </li>
        <li>Beseech That-Which-Endures for protection</li>
        <li>
          Give their physical form to They-Who-Witness, so that it might become what
          the world needs in this moment.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Null Tolerance, Psychometry,
        Shapeshifting, Soul-work, Telekinesis, Transcendence, Universal Repositories
      </p>
      <p>
        All members of the Ægis who operate in the Basin take on the Aura of Heaven.
        All who make their homes in the Realms Beyond know The Calling. Many
        Shieldbearers know both.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        Most Shieldbearer names begin with a positive adjective, and then a fairly
        specific anatomical pose or reference. The pose is the short version. Some are
        different; see below.
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Terms of humility, respect, and duty. Radiant Bowed Head. Irrefutable Open
          Heart. Dedicated Hand-On-Brow.
        </li>
        <li>
          Terms of righteous action. Cheerful Giving Hand. Honorable Foot Forward.
          Meritorious Stretched Wing.
        </li>
        <li>
          Descriptions of their unusual forms or abilities. This is especially common
          amongst the gods of the Ægis, and these names are generally not shortened
          even in casual conversation. The All-Blue Eye. Seventeen Wings of Destiny.
          Burns-With-Truth. The Inversion of Despair.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        For those Shieldbearers who are born (and not not sprung full-grown),
        childhood names start with just the body part (Wing, Hand, Heart, etc.) and
        are expanded at a coming-of-age. A Sheildbearer who changes their name should
        expect to have many kind and curious kin asking about their new outlook on
        life. It's friendly and well-intentioned but can be a little exhausting after
        the tenth or eleventh time.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Explorer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Answer the Call 3, Raise Every Voice 3, See the Next Horizon 5 <br />
        Natures: C3, I4, M3, S5, T2, W3 <br />
        Professions: Explorer 5, Medium 3, Linguist 2, Historian 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Aura of Heaven [Expanded Expertise (Satori), Guising, Null
        Tolerance, Travel, Universal Repositories]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Diplomat</strong> <br />
        CVs: Answer the Call 3, Raise Every Voice 4, Trust is Earned 3 <br />
        Natures: C4, I2, M3, S3, T4, W2 <br />
        Professions: Politician 3, Prolocutor 2, Spy 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Calling [Guising, Farspeaking, Rapport, Transcendence], The
        Aura of Heaven [Mystic Servitors, Shapeshifting, Universal Repositories]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Bodyguard</strong> <br />
        CVs: Answer the Call 4, Raise Every Voice 2, Protect the Needy 4 <br />
        Natures: C3, I2, M4, S4, T2, W4 <br />
        Professions: Soldier 3, Healer 2, Spy 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Aura of Heaven [Null Tolerance, Shapeshifting, Soul-work,
        Telekinesis, Warding, Weaponry]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Historian</strong> <br />
        CVs: Answer the Call 2, Raise Every Voice 3, Answers Lie in the Past 4 <br />
        Natures: C2, I2, M5, S3, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Historian 3, Scholar (Glory) 2, Teacher 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Calling [Psychometry, Sixth Sense, Spirit-Walking, Travel,
        Universal Repositories]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="The Hearth-kin" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="hearth_kin">The Hearth-kin</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        The Interregnum was a terrifying time in the Great Basin. Armies marched every
        day. Cities were destroyed by fire and ice and plague. Assassination was
        commonplace, and oaths of vengeance dragged out wars for dozens and even
        hundreds of years.
      </p>
      <p>
        Many in the Basin feared for their lives and their families. Some of them
        (like Those Above the Sky) stayed in the same world but moved away from the
        Basin. Others (like Glimmermere) drifted into Dream Realms to escape. The
        ancestors of the Hearth-kin went to the Worlds Beyond. This was dangerous
        territory. These folk made some of the earliest maps of the Worlds Beyond,
        showing safe passages and dangerous locales. That knowledge was often paid for
        in lives and limbs lost. Eventually, though, they found places that were
        hospitable to them, with pantheons who looked on what happened in the Basin
        with sorrow and were happy to take in refugees.
      </p>
      <p>
        Over time, many of these expatriated families found each other. They expressed
        sadness at the state of the world. They felt guilty for leaving when they
        might have helped (even if, in truth, the wars were driven by forces they
        could not have opposed). They regretted their abandonment of the world, and
        resolved to return to it – to take responsibility for their actions and to
        live up to their potential.
      </p>
      <p>
        A great oath (“The Congerie”) sealed them together into one large family, the
        Hearth-kin. They are returning even now to the Basin. The trip back has not
        been quick or easy, but they are prepared and determined to make a difference.
        The group's advance scouts find the places where they can do the most good,
        where things are most dire or where injustice is rampant. The Hearth-kin then
        descend onto those places from the Worlds Beyond and immediately work to make
        right what went wrong.
      </p>

      <aside title="Getting Lost">
        <h3 id="get_lost">Getting Lost</h3>

        <p>
In a world where Travel is a possibility, how did the
          Hearth-kin and the Unroyal end up lost? Couldn’t they just open a gate and
          walk back?
        </p>
        <p>
          Travel depends on being able to specify your destination very well.
          Normally, to return to the Basin, one could simply ask for a door to “my
          house” or “my hometown”, or at worst rely on the mystical resonance between
          one’s body and the Basin that gave it life.
        </p>
        <p>
          Unfortunately, memories fade, places change, and even mystical resonance is
          not forever. After a few years away from the Basin, Travel will not bring
          you back to where you started. Worse, it may bring you somewhere that only
          seems similar.
        </p>
        <p>
          Those who go through Becoming or frequently use shapeshifting will lose
          their resonance more quickly. Those who visit home more often will retain
          their passport, as it were.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        The transformation of the Hearth-kin is more internal than external. Their
        bodies appear much as they did four hundred years ago, though with exaggerated
        features, animal-like touches, or scars from their travels through the Worlds
        Beyond. When the Hearth-kin arrive in a location they often send out someone
        who looks like the locals to make first contact, counting on assumed biases to
        close the perceived gap in familiarity.
      </p>
      <p>
        Families often feel a strong connection to their ancestral lands and cultures.
        Many of them found their current partners through a shared love of their old
        homelands, or when someone cooked food that someone else thought long
        forgotten.
      </p>
      <p>
        When the Hearth-kin settle a place, they often plant a Hometree on a ley line
        confluence. This powerful structure serves as housing, provides food, and
        defends those within. It even drops fruits knotted with aspected flow.
        Hundreds of widely differing families will inhabit the same Hometree, each of
        them with elders, infants, cousins, and adopted family galore.
      </p>

      <h3>Life Among the Hearth-kin</h3>
      <p>
        Hometrees are the center of Hearth-kin life. They tower above the landscape,
        hundreds of meters tall and just as wide. Most families live in or beneath a
        Hometree. Houses are build into them or on their branches.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children do chores in the morning and evening, and attend schools during the
        day. Adults who are on their work day might cook, teach classes, connect with
        local communities, research the Basin, tend the Hometree, or plant and nurture
        mystical vegetation. Those on their rest day play board and card games, take
        hikes and runs, play sports, or make artwork.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Hearth-kin settle matters via direct democracy, but prefer
        consensus-building to explicit votes. When votes do happen, everyone above the
        age of twenty years is counted. Leaders are appointed by vote for specific
        tasks, such as constructing housing or speaking with local dignitaries. Their
        authority technically extends only to matters directly related to that task,
        but in practice their words are often given weight on other matters as well.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Conflict, Connection, Duty, Love, Memory,
        Nature, Sun, Water, Wood
      </p>

      <aside title="Spirits">
        <h3 id="spirits">Spirits</h3>

        <p>
          Spirits are immaterial beings who are connected to some part of the natural
          world, called their anchor. They are of roughly human intellect and
          personality, which means one can interact with them. All of them are
          inherently magical beings who received only a small portion of the Gift.
        </p>
        <p>
          Most spirits are <strong>large</strong> – they are anchored not to a single
          tree, but to an entire forest. It is possible for a single tree, sword, or
          stone to have a spirit, but it is rare. More often, objects are used as
          conduits to greater spirits, such as when one calls up the God of Ores by
          standing in front of a pile of carefully mined iron ore. Conjured objects
          cannot serve as conduits, though using them in particular ways might change
          this. For instance, a conjured sword could not call forth a forge-god, but a
          sword made from conjured iron could be. A conjured tree would not be an
          anchor to the forest-god, but an oak grown from a conjured acorn could be.
        </p>
        <p>
          Changes to a spirit’s anchor causes changes in that spirit. Changes they do
          not consent to are damaging to them. For instance, the spirit of a forest
          that is chopped down may die, or (if it is willing) it may become a lumber
          spirit.
        </p>
        <p>
          Most spirits are <strong>asleep</strong>. They do not act and are scarcely
          conscious until they are interacted with. Afterward, most return to their
          slumber, but some stay awake, especially if they have been called up
          frequently, as happens with the Hearth-kin and the Worldbuilders. Calling up
          a spirit requires a <a href="Magic.xhtml#mystic_connections">mystic connection</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          A spirit’s will can alter its anchor. Storm-spirits are frequently called
          upon to quiet themselves, though they are rarely interested in this.
        </p>
        <p>
          Spirits do not heal on their own. If their anchor can be restored (as with
          the aforementioned forest spirit) they will heal; if a river is dammed
          against the spirit’s will the river-spirit will be injured so long as the
          dam remains. Magical healing (via the Communion-nature) can help with this.
        </p>
        <p>
          All of this applies in the Great Basin. Other parts of the Kaleidoscope may
          work differently. We leave this option open for GMs who want to explore
          different setups in their game.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <h3>Spotlight: Family</h3>
      <p>
        The Hearth-kin traveled in large family groups on their way back to the Basin.
        This was both for companionship and for protection against a dangerous world.
        Their initial settlements tend to be 400-500 individuals, many of them distant
        cousins, with another two extended families arriving within the year.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Hearth-kin have three primary sexes: two who provide genetic material, and
        a third sex that incubates the material until the birth of the child. This was
        an unanticipated side-effect of the Congerie, but one that the Hearth-kin have
        embraced over time.
      </p>
      <p>
        The first sex, niha, are known for keen perception and wanderlust. The second
        sex, bachav, are known for being slow but strong and durable, with a high pain
        tolerance. The third sex, ranan, are known for feats of memory and creativity,
        and for being hungry often. The niha fertilize the bachav's eggs, which they
        in turn provide to the ranan.
      </p>
      <p>
        Some Hearth-kin live the majority of their life in one of these sexes, but
        most use the Self-nature to switch back and forth from year to year depending
        on their current mindset. (Much as with differences between male and female
        characters, there are no game effects for these sexes.)
      </p>
      <p>
        Many families have three parents, and romantic triads are common. Diads who
        want a family often find a surrogate for the third sex. Those without families
        are assumed to be incredibly lonely.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children among the Hearth-kin are stereotypically happy, loud, numerous, and
        smart enough to shut up and hole up when there might be danger. Having a
        family is considered part of growing up among the Hearth-kin, and no one is
        considered an adult until they've raised children of their own.
      </p>
      <p>
        As in all human civilizations, some children are born as intersex, not easily
        assigned to one of the three sexes. The Hearth-kin honor these children the
        same as any other, and try to help them find their place or stake out a new
        space for themselves. All Hearth-kin are acutely aware of what it feels like
        to have others treat them as bizarre for how they were born, and they will not
        do that to their own children.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Brother's Keeper</h3>
      <p>
        The Hearth-kin have no formal code of justice. They've seen such things abused
        too often in the Worlds Beyond. This leads to an inconsistent approach, with
        what is and is not a crime being decided by local elected tribunals. One
        Hometree's justices might decide that it's unreasonable to tap the local ley
        line without emergency need, and demand that restitution be paid to those
        downstream. Another Hometree's council might deem it reasonable but insist on
        oversight. These judgments are rarely written down, and there's not much care
        for consistency. Let the punishment fit the crime, and let reeducation and
        restitution be more common than punishment; that's Hearth-kin justice in a
        nutshell.
      </p>
      <p>
        One element that's consistent across the Hearth-kin is the idea that everyone
        is responsible for one another in all that they do. This applies on a
        community-wide level (you can't just banish someone and let them hurt other
        civilizations) and on an individual level. If your friend is doing something
        wrong, you can't just walk away and wash your hands of it. If you know they're
        going to hurt someone, you share in the blame when you decide not to stop
        them.
      </p>
      <p>
        Visitors from other civilizations often find this very difficult. It leads to
        the sort of behavior that most people associate with organized crime, but
        aimed in an entirely different direction. Both would say “If you screw this up
        I'm on the line too”, but rather than saying, “Stay quiet, do what's good for
        you, don't be a snitch”, the Hearth-kin encourage one another: “Stand up, do
        what's right, get loud if you have to.” You'll never hear the phrase “mind
        your own business” among the Hearth-kin. Everyone's business is everyone
        else's business, and citizens believe that they'll all rise or fall together.
      </p>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Healing fruits</li>
        <li>Eyes lit from within</li>
        <li>Everyone carries a knife</li>
        <li>Fast-growing vegetation</li>
        <li>Features taken from animals</li>
        <li>Strident philosophical debates</li>
        <li>People calling each other “cousin”</li>
        <li>Spirits of forests, beasts, and weather</li>
        <li>People taking care of each other's children</li>
        <li>Herbology greenhouses soundproofed for mandrake</li>
        <li>Frequent lightning storms that provide or discharge excess flow</li>
        <li>
          Tattoos bearing strange powers from the blood of creatures in the Worlds
          Beyond
        </li>
        <li>
          Mementoes of friends long distant to help trigger cascades of memory and
          willpower
        </li>
        <li>
          Children learning and playing with sprites, pixies, and other small spirits
          of Earthpower
        </li>
        <li>
          Redwood treehouses growing in the middle of a savannah, or jungles
          impossibly sprouting in arctic regions
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        Members of the Hearth-kin know that to <strong>Love your Family</strong> is
        the highest calling. You don't have to get along, but you have to try. You
        don't have to obey, but you have to listen. You don't have to agree, but you
        have to help someone who’s in a tough spot. Much as the Hearth-kin didn't all
        start out as family, an individual member's definition of “Family” can include
        whomever they want, not just those sworn in Congerie.
      </p>
      <p>
        But you can't just sit out and be with your family while there are things to
        be done. <strong>Build a Just World</strong>. Help the
        oppressed, oppose tyrants, and call out injustice where you see it – and don't
        wait. Action today is better than excuses tomorrow.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>All members of the Hearth-kin know both of these Traditions.</p>
      <p>
        <strong>What Binds Us</strong> was used to create the pact that originally
        united the Hearth-kin. It follows the often-maligned path of Blood Magic to
        the fount of Earthpower. The Hearth-kin's blood-oath to the universe and its
        people is what allows them to draw on that Fount. It is this that keeps this
        new civilization together, both in terms of communication and in terms of
        building homes for everyone and defending them. Its masters can:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Mark a necklace with a drop of blood to ward off curses</li>
        <li>Grow a healing herb in their wild hair or by spitting on the ground</li>
        <li>Listen to their own heartbeat to hear the voices of distant friends</li>
        <li>
          Cut their hand over the ground in a ritual pattern and summon forth a living
          watchtower with lichen circuitry and protective patterns writ in gleaming
          leaves
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Cloning, Conjuration, Healing,
        Multitasking, Nature-work, Warding, Weather-work
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>What Defines Us</strong> counterbalances the binding tradition,
        letting each person follow their own Beliefs and achieve Arete. It is the
        magic of one's own mind, body, and soul, separate from others. The Core Values
        that power What Defines Us are almost always drawn from a personal or societal
        belief rather than from one of the civilization's common CVs. Adepts of the
        defining tradition have:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Burned away illusions with their dedication to the truth</li>
        <li>Led their enemies into pocket dimensions for the sheer laugh of it</li>
        <li>
          Meditated upon their own nature until they became their greatest dreams
        </li>
        <li>
          Explored the intersection between love and charity to enchant others with
          healing power
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Hypnopraxis, Nightmare Exile,
        Personae, Shapeshifting, Spirit-walking, Transcendence, Travel
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>A family name followed by a personal name.</p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Family names refer to places of origin in the Worlds Beyond, or to
          hometrees. Most of these refer to physical properties. Deepchasm. Foldsea.
          Skyrealm. Goldenleaf. Squirrelhome.
        </li>
        <li>
          Some personal names are an emotion or a habit. Stubbornness. Serenity.
          Affection. Elation. Other personal names come from an events when one was
          born. Thunderstorm. Sun-day. Eclipse. Arrival.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        Because most Hearth-kin change sex frequently, there are no general
        differences between niha, bachav, and ranan names. Personal names are oen
        passed down from grandparents or great-great-grandparents, so name changes are
        rare unless one's ancestor has somehow disgraced themselves.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Head of Household</strong> <br />
        CVs: Love your Family 4, Build a Just World 2, Keep the Peace 3 <br />
        Natures: C4, I3, M3, S5, T3, W3 <br />
        Professions: Politician 3, Medium 2, Historian 1 <br />
        Tradition: What Binds Us [Healing, Multitasking, Rapport, Warding] What
        Defines Us [Energy Wave, Shapeshifting]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Teacher</strong> <br />
        CVs: Love your Family 3, Build a Just World 3, Pass On Your Knowledge 4 <br />
        Natures: C3, I2, M4, S3, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Teacher 3, Scholar (Earthpower) 2, Theurge (Earthpower) 1
        <br />
        Tradition: What Binds Us [Mental Acuity, Multitasking] What Defines Us
        [Hypnopraxis, Personae]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Arborist</strong> <br />
        CVs: Love your Family 2, Build a Just World 2, Sanctity of Nature 4 <br />
        Natures: C2, I5, M3, S4, T2, W3 <br />
        Professions: Theurge (Earthpower) 3, Scholar (Earthpower) 2, Healer 1 <br />
        Tradition: What Binds Us [Cloning, Conjuration, Distillation, Nature-work,
        Weather-work] What Defines Us [Transcendence, Travel]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Healer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Love your Family 4, Build a Just World 4, Put Aside Grievances 2 <br />
        Natures: C5, I2, M3, S3, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Healer 3, Farmer 2, Samaritan 1 <br />
        Tradition: What Binds Us [Healing, Rapport] What Defines Us [Dream Travel]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="Nova Commonwealth" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="nova_commonwealth">Nova Commonwealth</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        A nova, or new star, is a new wish of Aion's expressed in shining light. This
        nation named itself after the same concept: a new, shining idea in the world.
      </p>
      <p>
        Nova was one of the first civilizations to escape the Interregnum. Being close
        to a number of natural magical locales and having many sorcerers already
        living in the area, they had a head start when it came to dealing with a
        magically-enhanced society. This let them give aid to shore up nearby kingdoms
        and federations when they threatened to collapse. This, in turn, made the core
        of their empire safer, freeing time for leisure and experimentation.
        Eventually they became less of an empire and more a federation of allied
        states, each seeking to advance sorcery in their own unique ways. They have
        seen several other civilizations come and go.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        Today Nova has splintered into over a thousand member groups, officially
        called states but more commonly referred to as sects or cults. The core of the
        group is a dozen larger sects with millions of members each. Many more
        conservative sects drew a line somewhere in their magical experimentation that
        they were unwilling to cross. Meanwhile, other more radical sects crossed the
        lines that no one else would. Sometimes this ends with eventual acceptance and
        a return to the fold. Sometimes not.
      </p>
      <p>
        Sects within the Nova are interest-driven, each with its own branch of
        knowledge. Each sect typically has its own area of specialty. Some focus on
        exploring Dream Realms. Others look for unifying principles between the Paths.
        Some are primarily economic, traveling the Basin to obtain the rare and
        strongly-aspected materials needed for others to continue their research. Some
        sects serve as temporary “retirement” communities where those who have grown
        weary or feel burned out can relax for a few years. Few citizens of Nova can
        bring themselves to rest on their laurels for too long.
      </p>
      <p>
        Because of the degree of specialization involved in such interests, deep
        investments are required to acquire the necessary understanding to
        participate. Outsiders are frequently left behind in technical conversations –
        and technical conversations are common. Those who join later in life, or who
        move from one sect to another, often supplement their personal expertise with
        mystical sources so as not to be casually ostracized.
      </p>
      <p>
        Of the Nova who have not experimented on their own bodies, most look fairly
        typical for the Basin. Experimentation often shows in the eyes first,
        transforming them in unexpected ways. When Nova citizens from different
        regions meet, they often find out about shared interests because their eyes or
        hair have been altered in the same manner. The more they alter their minds or
        souls, the more deeply it is likely to appear in their bodies.
      </p>

      <h3>Life in the Commonwealth</h3>
      <p>
        There are two general types of sect within the Commonwealth. One is
        research-oriented (Mystery sects), the other is devoted more to infrastructure
        and governance (Industry sects). Mystery sects move around a lot, sometimes
        because they’re small and mobile (e.g. they operate within an airship),
        sometimes because they’re all willing to leave behind their houses to follow
        the next big event in their research area. Industry sects are often tucked
        away in extreme environments, where their sorcery shields them from immediate
        danger. They might be inside a volcano, or underwater, or in a cloud city.
      </p>
      <p>
        Nova’s children are trained through an apprenticeship program. They’re
        encouraged to follow their interests and seek new experiences. However,
        they’re often ignorant of things outside the narrow focus of their
        apprenticeships. Deep knowledge is valued over breadth of learning. Few
        Commonwealth citizens know much about history or philosophy.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most adults in the Commonwealth join or create a small group of friends
        focused around a particular task. In research sects, they find or explore or
        analyze. In mainstay sects, they build or repair or consult.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each sect of Nova is ruled differently, with democracy being fairly common.
        Settling disputes between different sects or setting direction for Nova as a
        whole is done by vote, but there is a fair amount of corruption, making it
        closer to a plutocracy at the higher levels. The one common factor is that
        individuals who disagree with their cult’s particular goals will split off to
        form a new group. Thus the Commonwealth grows.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Chaos, Desire, Focus, Need, Obsession, Pride.
        Other aspects vary substantially from sect to sect. There will always be some
        related to the cult’s area of focus.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Responsibility</h3>
      <p>
        The Commonwealth expects its citizens (and people in general) to act
        responsibly. If everyone does what they want, then everyone needs to act in a
        mature and conscientious manner or civilization falls apart. There are minimal
        laws in the Commonwealth, aimed primarily at settling disputes between sects.
        Consequences at the personal level are far more often delivered via social
        pressure than via law enforcement. This might sound ineffective, but keep in
        mind that “social pressure” means “a thousand archmagi have all gotten
        together and decided you're a rotten git”. That's not something to trifle
        with. Confusing for outsiders, yes. Ineffective, no.
      </p>
      <p>
        Unfortunately, there's a certain amount of blame attached here as well, and a
        conceit of superiority. Nova citizens often feel that people from the
        Commonwealth, with their magical prowess, should not be making excuses when
        something bad happens – even when that thing is the result of someone else's
        actions. You should have known. You should have acted differently.
      </p>
      <p>
        When one person feels they've been unfairly treated, and the other party
        refuses to admit wrongdoing, there's often little recourse within the
        Commonwealth's legal system. Extreme cases lead to people rounding up as many
        friends as are willing to participate and meting out punishment on their own.
        “Mob justice” has an uncomfortably large role in Nova's history.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: The Million Ways</h3>
      <p>
        When the Hearth-kin returned from the Worlds Beyond, with their unexpected new
        sexes, some civilizations questioned whether they should technically be
        considered human. The change was large, many said. They should be considered a
        new class of being.
      </p>
      <p>
        Nova refused to even begin that discussion. Across thousands of sects, almost
        unanimously, they spoke: There would be no debate on this front.
      </p>
      <p>
        There was no redeeming quality, stated the citizens and rulers of Nova, in a
        debate on whether or not someone was considered human. The Commonwealth
        charter did not even contain the words “human beings” – it spoke of the rights
        of “all self-aware beings” and even of “all beings”, because the road to
        “technically not human” was a road of bigotry, degradation, and disgrace.
        There would be no debate. Nova demanded, on behalf of the Hearth-kin, the same
        respect for selves and rights that was shown to all other individuals, because
        there are a million ways to be alive, and humanity is no greater than any
        other thinking being. With Nova's size and influence, the other civilizations
        had little choice but to agree.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Covenant of the Million Ways has guided Nova well in many other matters as
        well, from providing equity amongst their own citizens to dealing with
        sentients from other parts of the Kaleidoscope. Nova is perhaps the easiest
        civilization to get around in for those whose bodies and minds differ from
        those of conventional humanity.
      </p>

      <aside title="Inter-Sect Infrastructure">
        <h3 id="sect_infra">Inter-Sect Infrastructure</h3>

        <p>
          Nova’s many groups are still bound together into a civilization in part
          because they depend on one another for magical trade goods. While each of
          them deeply researches a single topic, singly-aspected flow is insufficient
          for such work. You can only plumb so far into Necromancy, for instance,
          before you end up needing something other than just death flow. (Plus, maybe
          you don’t want to go about making all that death flow yourself and want to
          import it from the Empty Grave instead.)
        </p>
        <p>
          Nova’s infrastructure is based primarily on shifting flow from one aspect to
          another, a process that leverages metaphor and analogy to mix aspects or
          flip multiple flows at once. For instance, they might route flow through a
          grove and a nursery, merging them to create growth-aspected flow and
          splitting out additional flows related to wood and blood. Sometimes the
          additional flows are useful and are tapped for something; other times they
          contribute to downstream pollution.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Complicated relationships</li>
        <li>Flamboyant fashion and style</li>
        <li>Aerial chariots and earth-swimming trains</li>
        <li>Romantic triads and quads, including as parents</li>
        <li>Massive turbines along ley lines that cleanse polluted flow</li>
        <li>Drawing Earthpower from multiple uninhabited alternate worlds</li>
        <li>Dumping chaotic flow beyond the Basin where it cannot harm anyone</li>
        <li>
          Infinitely-recursive dreams within dreams generating oneiromantic power
        </li>
        <li>
          Buildings floating in mid-air, often in multiple layers above one another
        </li>
        <li>
          Alternating cells of wild magic and static patterns that spontaneously build
          new structures
        </li>
        <li>
          Ley Junctioning by which individuals can “donate” unused power back to
          Nova's ley line network, and draw more on it when the need arises
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        The first rule of the Commonwealth is <strong>Cause No Harm</strong>. Magic
        can have horrible side-effects, and many magi in the past have done terrible
        things simply because they had the power and no one could stop them. The most
        radical or conservative of sects typically splinter off because they disagree
        on what will cause harm. The mainline of Nova culture sees Cause No Harm as an
        imperative that extends even to economic and societal harms, tying in strongly
        with their ideas of responsibility and the Million Ways.
      </p>
      <p>
        Once you've learned to avoid harm, <strong>Do What Thou Wilt</strong>. This is
        not a passive dismissal of other's actions or behavior; this is a commandment.
        Find what you love, or find what you want to do, and do it. Nova has a
        well-deserved reputation for bleeding-edge mystic art, and this is part of
        why. The Commonwealth does not consider it proper business to police one
        another's work, either on a personal level or sect-to-sect. With magic and
        immortality a real part of the world, there are few mistakes that cannot be
        repaired afterward, with amends and apologies made.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        Each sect has its own unique Tradition; sometimes more than one. The most
        common Founts are Alchemy and Oneiromancy. The more material Paths tend to
        dominate, as they are easier to experiment with, but there are sects
        representing every Path and every Fount. Players of Nova characters should
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#invent_trad">create their own Tradition(s)</a>.
      </p>
      <p>
        Certain Expressions are more common than others. Many sects pursue Expanded
        Expertise in various ways. Esoteric arts like Lagged Curses, the Burning
        Dream, Tailored Canon, and Mnemosurgery are much more common across the
        Commonwealth than in other civilizations.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        “Verb(er) of Noun(s)”, or occasionally Noun-Verb(er). Different sects can
        sometimes be distinguished by a particular pattern, such as an added adjective
        or all of their nouns being from a particular class (like emotions or
        reagents).
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Action verbs. Traveler of Horizons. Collector of Truths. Seeker of Novelty.
          Breaker of Traditions. Oath-taker.
        </li>
        <li>
          Thought verbs. Watcher of Clouds. Solver of Puzzles. Judger of Wishes.
          Song-writer.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        Most Commonwealth citizens change their name when it becomes clear that the
        old one is inappropriate. Sometimes it's hard for individuals to see when
        they've changed, and their friends have to throw them a new-name party.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Researcher</strong> <br />
        CVs: Cause no Harm 1, Do What Thou Wilt 5, Seek the Truth 4 <br />
        Natures: C2, I5, M5, S2, T2, W4 <br />
        Professions: Scholar (Alchemy) 4, Theurge (Alchemy) 4, Soldier 4, Merchant 3,
        Teacher 2, Criminal 1
        <br />
        Tradition: The Becoming of Aion [Deconjuration, Distillation, Energy Wave,
        Expanded Expertise (Prodigy), Sixth Sense]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Administrator</strong> <br />
        CVs: Cause no Harm 3, Do What Thou Wilt 1, Herd the Cats 4 <br />
        Natures: C4, I2, M3, S2, T4, W2 <br />
        Professions: Politician 3, Scholar (Oneiromancy) 2, Prolocutor 1
        <br />
        Tradition: The Thousand Blank Cards [Conjuration, Farspeech, Guising,
        Mnemosurgery, Universal Repositories]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>First Responder</strong> <br />
        CVs: Cause no Harm 5, Do What Thou Wilt 2, Keep It Under Wraps 3 <br />
        Natures: C3, I3, M3, S3, T3, W3 <br />
        Professions: Samaritan 5, Theurge (Elementalism) 3, Healer 2, Teacher 1
        <br />
        Tradition: Five Corners Discipline [Expanded Expertise (Satori), Healing, Null
        Tolerance, Telekinesis, Uncountable Spinners]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Spirit Envoy</strong> <br />
        CVs: Cause no Harm 4, Do What Thou Wilt 2, Listen Before Acting 3, {Respect
        the Spirits 3} <br />
        Natures: C5, I2, M4, S5, T4, W2 <br />
        Professions: {Medium 3, Prolocutor 3, Theurge (Oneiromancy) 3, Scholar
        (Oneiromancy) 3, Spy 3}, Clergy 3, Explorer 2, Courtesan 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Dreams of the Gods [Dream Travel, Dream-shaping, Expanded
        Expertise (Archetypal), Nightmare Exile, Rapport, Warding]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="The Sovereigns of Hell" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="sovereigns_of_hell">The Sovereigns of Hell</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        Some parts of the Basin are, by luck or ancient curse or mere coincidence,
        connected with other worlds. One particular kingdom was uncomfortably close to
        one of the Worlds Beyond: a hellish plane of devils and fire. For untold ages
        these creatures regularly brought strife and grief to the lands.
      </p>
      <p>
        When the Gift came, someone unknown closed the gap, letting that hell spill
        over into the Basin. The kingdom was ravaged by demons for decades. Tempters,
        warlords, deceivers and destroyers, they showed the common folk no mercy,
        letting them recover only long enough that they would be good sport again.
      </p>
      <p>
        It was a century before the resistance gathered well enough, and learned well
        enough to fight. In a holy crusade, every citizen rallied their power, and
        together they invaded the demon realm. In a few short years they had claimed a
        space a hundred koss on a side and forced the denizens there into servitude.
        While demon-binding is no longer a valid art, there are other ways to force
        those weaker than you to serve.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        The Sovereignty now is a land of beauty and majesty, its natural bounty clear
        for all to see. The citizens there live lives of ease and happiness, and all
        their needs are provided for. Meanwhile, in Hell, the war continues, The Grand
        Conquest. Sorcerer-generals lead armies of devils deeper into that world,
        conquering ever more territory. They mean to see that the natives of this hell
        will never threaten the Basin again, and that they will regret what they did
        in perpetuity.
      </p>
      <p>
        A Sovereign's identity is formed in great part around the way in which they
        react to the Grand Conquest. Do they savor the victory? Do they regret their
        peoples' actions? Or (like most born after the Gift) are they so steeped in
        the-way-things-are that having impish servants and demonic advisors has become
        natural for them? Sovereign culture is large enough to encompass all these
        things, but that doesn't mean people aren't judged for their choices.
      </p>
      <p>
        Sovereigns don't so much dislike outsiders as simply mistrust them. They know
        how most people see them. Why would someone want to join them, or even speak
        with them?
      </p>

      <h3>Life Among the Sovereigns</h3>
      <p>
        The first thing that visitors notice when they come to Sovereignty is, of
        course, the demons. They come in a myriad of forms and sizes. Most are
        reminiscent of humanity but unsettling in some way, with goat-like eyes, swine
        hooves, or razor-taloned hands. All of them have an obsession with humanity.
      </p>
      <p>
        Demons serve the Sovereigns from birth. They feed and swaddle infants, educate
        children, keep families safe, and advise generals. Their magic of Devilpower
        (see below) comes directly from these creatures’ natural abilities, which
        before they had shared only with those who made deals with them. Because of
        all this, most Sovereigns live a life of ease and luxury.
      </p>
      <p>
        Sovereign cities are full of bizarre buildings with sometimes unhelpful
        structures. Demons simply told to “make me a house” will not apply human
        aesthetics to it, and spikes, spines, moats, mouths, and all manner of
        bio-horror appear in their work. Some Sovereigns command that these things be
        removed; others like seeing the reactions of outsiders as they attempt to be
        polite.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Sovereigns are nominally an autarchy, ruled by the Imperios of Hell.
        Realistically, this ruler's decrees are few because of the high likelihood
        that they will be ignored. Individual families rule themselves for the most
        part.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Control, Dispassion, Fire, Independence,
        Moon, Servitude, Wrath
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Seduction</h3>
      <p>
        In the old days there were incubi and succubi aplenty traveling the
        Sovereigns' kingdom. These demons had a particular interest in sexual
        temptation, and in using that as power over mortals. Whatever you might
        imagine about them is likely true – they were creatures of archetype and
        stereotype, but not much additional personality.
      </p>
      <p>
        To protect themselves from this deviltry the citizens started concealing their
        genders. They wore loose-fitting garments; they bound their sex
        characteristics; they shaved and plucked. Eventually the denied tempter demons
        were so frustrated that they lost much of their power. This process took
        decades, and was important for centuries more. Concealing one's gender was
        deeply ingrained in the Sovereigns' society by the time the Gift arrived.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Sovereigns still keep to this tradition today. Robes and hoods are still
        common clothing. Beards are almost unheard-of. The vast majority use the
        Trickery-nature to further conceal their identities. Sexuality is important
        amongst the Sovereigns – indeed, it is quite valued – but a Sovereign's sexual
        identity is something that they only reveal to their closest associates.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Independence</h3>
      <p>
        When people care to list the positive aspects of the Sovereigns of Hell, one
        particular phrase is most commonly listed: “Fiercely Independent”. Sovereigns
        won't let anyone tell them what to do, and they'll go to substantial lengths
        to make sure that they're not even in a position where they'd have to obey
        orders.
      </p>
      <p>
        Some of this comes across as stubbornness, an “I'll do it myself” mentality
        that appears even when “do it myself” means “call forth a demon to do it for
        me”. Sovereigns work well in parallel, and they're excellent improvisers, but
        they're more likely to throw out a plan that seems poor and attempt to do
        things their own way. They learn a lot this way. Sometimes they're only able
        to learn from these moments because they're immortal.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Sovereigns' personal independence also leads to some unexpected
        consequences. For instance, Sovereigns rarely borrow. When they do, they
        always pay their debts – and quickly. For them, a debt is a chain that
        vanishes into the fog. You never really know who will be on the other end.
        They also write very clearly delineated contracts, with well-defined
        deliverables. (Their entire legal system, such as it is, consists of
        contracts, plus the occasional vendetta against oathbreakers.) Their
        independence also keeps the number of Sovereigns in the Archive low – sure,
        they're interested in the world's secret history, but then they might have to
        kowtow to some know-it-all higher up the academic hierarchy, and who wants to
        live like that?
      </p>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Children playing with demons</li>
        <li>Adults lounging and sipping cocktails</li>
        <li>Researchers or generals directing vast armies of spirits</li>
        <li>Cities made strange, compelling, and beautiful by alien minds</li>
        <li>
          Networks of imps working according to a plan on large, complex projects
        </li>
        <li>
          Swarms of minute homonculi that congregate to serve as assistants, squires,
          apprentices, and nursemaids
        </li>
        <li>
          Kilometer-wide lenses focusing the light of the Nine Deathly Moons of Hell
          for enhanced magical potency
        </li>
        <li>
          Arcs of lightning, fire, and other energy displays that convey mystical
          power and demon-spirits from place to place
        </li>
        <li>
          Servants called from the Worlds Beyond with bold-colored skin, extra limbs,
          wings, insectile or piscine features, and nimbuses of dark power
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        The Sovereigns have learned over centuries that holding to tradition won them
        nothing but pain and suffering. <strong>Transgression</strong> is what broke
        them loose from eons of abuse. Holding to the beliefs of the past is not
        valued in the Sovereignty; one must blaze new paths and throw antique
        moralities to the side if they stand in the way.
      </p>
      <p>
        On their coming-of-age day, the young folk of the Sovereignty are told: You
        need prove nothing. If outsiders demand that you show what right you have to
        command the demons, if your friends press you to perform tricks for them, if
        someone tells you that dues must be paid in order to participate, you owe them
        nothing. They have lowered themselves by asking. Your will and your life are
        yours and yours alone. Each person born after the Gift is a dictatorship unto
        themselves if they wish to be, and none are so high that they may make demands
        of its ruler. This is immortalized in the phrase,
        <strong>Every Soul a Fortress</strong>, which adorns the
        gates the Sovereigns erected between the demon world and our own.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        The most common route to power among the Sovereigns is known as
        <strong>Devilpower</strong>, or, in more flowery language, The Fearless Path.
        It demands that the gods of Hell act as Patrons, calling forth Expressions
        from the fount of Glory. From household tasks to construction to battle, the
        Sovereigns call demons to do their work for them, one chore at a time. A
        Sovereign might call upon:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Minor imps and foul spirits, to do their daily chores</li>
        <li>Ungheta Gall-Of-Fire, to build walls of solid flame and darkness</li>
        <li>Korgarrath the Barren Mind, to cloud thoughts and lure the unwary</li>
        <li>!Angu the Twice-Strong, to curse their foes with weakness</li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Curses, Lagged Curses,
        Multitasking, Mystic Servitors, the Shell Game, Telekinesis
      </p>
      <p>
        Not every Sovereign wants to have their actions seen by their ancient enemies,
        and so <strong>The Sage's Path</strong>,
        also known as The Coward's Path, is still commonly practiced. It takes the
        path of Geometry to the fount of Glory, creating similar effects but
        concentrating more on understanding than on the arts of war. Master sages have
        been known to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Bend the eye and trap the mind with clever patterns</li>
        <li>
          Create simple animals through extensive manuals of geometric description
        </li>
        <li>Write forbidden formulae that open a hole to the Red Space</li>
        <li>
          Build the first stretch of a road in such a way that it will, from that
          point, build itself forever forward
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Hallucination, Knotwork,
        Psychometry, the Red Space, Travel
      </p>
      <p>
        Once practiced only in secret, but now a darling of the avant-garde set,
        <strong>The Silent Path</strong> steps from Reagents to Necromancy. It is
        known as a spy's art, but it also sees use by Sovereign architects and
        builders who need a greater permanence than Devilpower or the Sage’s Path can
        afford them. Those on the Silent Path have been said to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Steal coins from the eyes of the dead that grant supernatural vision
        </li>
        <li>Disappear in a cloud of smoke and incense</li>
        <li>Send ghostly messengers across the dimensions</li>
        <li>
          Use powder made from a dozen undead creatures in perfect proportion to
          temporarily invigorate the living
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Dream Travel, Healing, Mystic
        Servitors, Personae, Psychometry, Spirit-Walking, Transcendence
      </p>
      <p>
        The majority of Sovereigns know Devilpower. Slightly under half know The
        Sage’s Path, though only a quarter use it as their primary Tradition. Only
        about ten percent know The Silent Path, but it’s primary for nearly all of
        those who know it.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        Nouns with farcical noble titles appended. Remember that most Sovereigns take
        great care to hide their genders, so titles should be kept as gender-neutral
        as possible.
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Gruesome or dangerous things. Marrow, the Seven Stars Autocrat. Broken Bone,
          First Among Firsts of the Blood Moon. Consumption, Tsar of the Thousand
          Topaz Demons. Razor, Consul to the Ice Fiend.
        </li>
        <li>
          Harmless things. Marigold, Khan of Shudder Chasm. Butterfly, Pharaoh of the
          Unwanted Dead. Fern, Minister of the Underlands. Puppy, Monarch of the Dozen
          Dooms.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        It's not uncommon for someone to take a new title. It's also not uncommon for
        two people to have similar or identical titles, as there's no central
        registry. Sovereigns will laughingly engage in mock battle to determine who
        gets to be “the <strong>real</strong> Obsidian Judge of Stardock”. Sometimes
        names change afterwards, sometimes not.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Demagogue</strong> <br />
        CVs: Transgression 3, Every Soul a Fortress 2, Suffer No Fools 3 <br />
        Natures: C5, I2, M3, S5, T5, W3 <br />
        Professions: Politician 3, Everything Else 2 <br />
        Tradition: Devilpower [Expanded Expertise (Polymath), Hallucination,
        Multitasking, Rapport]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Fashionista</strong> <br />
        CVs: Transgression 4, Every Soul a Fortress 2, You Can Be Exquisite 4 <br />
        Natures: C4, I3, M2, S5, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Artist (Clothing, Drawing) 3, Merchant 2, Prolocutor 1
        <br />
        Tradition: The Silent Path [Enchantment, Personae, Transcendence], The Sage’s
        Path [Conjuration, Psychometry, the Red Path]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Idler</strong> <br />
        CVs: Transgression 3, Every Soul a Fortress 2, I Owe No One 4 <br />
        Natures: C3, I3, M3, S3, T3, W3 <br />
        Professions: Courtesan 3, Explorer 2, Athlete 1
        <br />
        Tradition: Devilpower [Conjuration, Mystic Servitors, Personae, Telekinesis]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Warleader</strong> <br />
        CVs: Transgression 4, Every Soul a Fortress 4, Damn the Damned 4 <br />
        Natures: C2, I5, M3, S2, T4, W5 <br />
        Professions: Soldier 4, Scholar (Glory) 4, Theurge (Glory) 4
        <br />Tradition: Devilpower [Curses, Lagged Curses], The Sage’s Path
        [Knotwork, the Ten Crore Stones, Travel]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="Those Above the Sky" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="those_above_the_sky">Those Above the Sky</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        The Interregnum lit the Great Basin like match to paper, but there were some
        areas less affected than others. The Nation of the Sacred Tree, for example,
        dealt very well with the Gift until local warlords turned pointed attentions
        their direction. The rulers there asked their people to build strong stone
        castles. The warlords vexed them with earthquakes. The rulers had the castles
        levitated above the ground. The warlords pounded them with meteors. The rulers
        ordered a measured retreat from their homeland. Slowly the entire nation moved
        itself down the beaches, across the ocean, farther up into the sky, and out of
        the Great Basin's atmosphere entirely.
      </p>
      <p id="attic_lines">
        It was there that they discovered the Attic Lines. With careful manipulation
        of the energies there, they were able to not only survive in the vacuum of
        space, but also to choke those warlords out of flow and regain their homeland.
        Many returned, but certain individuals, who saw the opportunity for power and
        importance, did not. They abandoned their old name and became Those Above the
        Sky.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        Those Above use their expertise to fracture off portions of the Attic Lines,
        directing refined or specially-aspected flow to their customers across the
        world. Other lines they combine or heal, taking care of the maintenance of
        this old but robust system of flow distribution. Some lines deliver polluted
        or chaotic flow to “dumps” near the edge of the Basin, where it will
        eventually flow out into the void. Those Above are not well-loved for their
        role in the Basin, but none have wanted to challenge them for their territory.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most of Those Above tend to be insular, congregating only with a chosen few
        whom they find appealing on the basis of beliefs (or at least professed
        beliefs). Clades of a few dozen to a few hundred individuals are common. Their
        interests tend to be more political and economical than religious. When they
        reach outside of their circle, they do so primarily to advance either its
        economic holdings or its ideology. They often advocate that others should
        approach the world as they themselves do, which would be easier were there
        more attic lines in the world and were Those Above the Sky not already holding
        a near-monopoly on their operation.
      </p>
      <p>
        Because their work touches dozens of civilizations, Those Above have a fairly
        accurate view of some of the issues that affect the Basin as a whole.
        Unfortunately, they tend to see themselves as being untouched by these
        matters, superior in both methodology and morality.
      </p>

      <h3>Life Among those Above</h3>
      <p>
        The space beyond the world is not comfortable or welcoming. It has no air, no
        warmth, no flow. Explorers must bring all that with them.
      </p>
      <p>
        Those Above have great stone castles that they enchanted long ago and
        carefully maintain. They seal in air, generate warmth, and draw flow from the
        Attic Lines. They are not unwelcoming – beautiful artwork adorns the walls,
        and rare plants too – but it is hard to forget that just outside those walls
        is vacuum. Life can be anxiety-producing. Constant joking and ribbing help to
        ease the tension.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children have no names. When adults speak to children, they say “come here,
        child” or “eldest, take this downstairs” or “sleep well, little one”. Children
        are so rare amongst Those Above that few households have more than two at a
        time, and most couples go decades between births. Children choose a name with
        their parents' help around age fifteen, but are not completely considered
        adults until age twenty-five.
      </p>
      <p>
        Those Above the Sky follow an anarcho-capitalist model with strong libertarian
        leanings. Each castle and its surrounding “village” handle one particular
        line, and they negotiate with each other and lean on one another to determine
        territorial boundaries.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Caution, Competition, Connection, Laughter,
        Independence, Pain, Responsibility, Stone, Void, Wealth
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Competition</h3>
      <p>
        A love of competition is considered important amongst Those Above. They
        compare themselves to one another on all manner of measurable and unmeasurable
        things – money, territory, deal-making, creativity, and more. This frequently
        manifests through braggadocio, put-down contests, and overacting. On-the-spot
        ceremonies are often conducted with a wink and a nod.
      </p>
      <p>
        It's understood that these things are temporary. This helps to protect the
        ego. Victory is fleeting, limited to a particular arena or a particular time.
        Fame is easy-come, easy-go. There's a constant need to defend one's standing,
        but standing changes so often that only repeated losses really begin to sting.
        (Usually.)
      </p>
      <p>
        This leads to a collision of expectations with other civilizations. Those who
        make deals with Those Above must tolerate constant bragging and insults.
        They'll say “It's only a joke” and “Oh, you'll be fine tomorrow”, but at the
        same time, Those Above feel hurt when people hold things against them for more
        than a day. They're also insulted when someone keeps to a contract out of
        long-term loyalty rather than immediately accepting a newer, better offer.
        Overall, Those Above are considered fairly childish by other civilizations.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Diligence</h3>
      <p>
        Life in the space beyond the Basin is hard. Humanity was created (literally)
        to live within the Basin, to benefit from its protection and its life-giving
        nature. Moving beyond those confines is difficult. To minimize the effects of
        void-essence and reduce infant mortality rates, Those Above the Sky have a
        meticulous set of guidelines that they memorize and practice. Their own minds
        and bodies are at stake.
      </p>
      <p>
        This same meticulous nature has spread into other aspects of life above the
        sky. People know not to be caught alone, so one always has traveling
        companions. Everyone keeps careful track of their belongings; therefore,
        borrowed things are returned promptly.
      </p>
      <p>
        Because many of these practices are ingrained in Those Above at a young age,
        it's hard for them to break bad habits. This helps to explain why there are so
        few of Those Above in other lands – they just don't adapt as well to
        environments that require constant adaptation instead of constant diligence.
      </p>

      <aside title="Economics">
        <h3 id="economics">Economics</h3>

        <p>
          Amongst the citizens of the Basin, trade mostly takes the form of bartered
          favors. No one who can conjure needs to struggle for food, water, or
          shelter. Money comes in primarily at the level of one city-state or
          civilization dealing with another. The standard unit for such transactions
          is the lakh-thaum: notionally, the volume of flow generated by a hundred
          people in a thousand days, if it were all cleanly aspected in some useful
          way.
        </p>
        <p>
          There are no “thaum coins” minted. (If there were, they would almost
          immediately fall into the Canon of Form and be trivial to counterfeit.)
          Instead, lakh-thaums are held “on paper” by banks and governments. Those
          Above the Sky provide quite favorable terms for banks. Where civilizations
          collect taxes, their people keep close records of debts and their worth.
          Where they do not, debts and favors tend to be more immediate and more
          personal.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Copious warning signs</li>
        <li>People traveling in groups</li>
        <li>Industrial vats of reagents awaiting use</li>
        <li>Non-fatal birth defects are fairly common</li>
        <li>Rows upon rows of automata making ritual inscriptions</li>
        <li>Ley Modulators that send signals through the Attic Lines</li>
        <li>Glowing arcs of power like water running down a window</li>
        <li>Eyes and skin shaded grey due to the low-flow surroundings</li>
        <li>Notably low sexual drive – romance exists, but children are rare</li>
        <li>Friends and acquaintances separated across tens of thousands of koss</li>
        <li>
          Castles floating in the void, with cubes, spheres, and more inventive shapes
          orbiting them, serving as homes
        </li>
        <li>
          Dictionary-sized “factories” that can quickly bud and grow various objects
          as part of their flow transmutation cycles
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        Young adults of this civilization start to
        <strong>Stand Alone</strong> early. They learn the arts of conjuration so that
        they will not go hungry, walk the roads of the self so that they can withstand
        physical hardship, and seek to strike out on their own as soon as they are
        able. Despite their connection with so many economies across the Basin, Those
        Above the Sky hate to depend on others, or even on the land itself.
      </p>
      <p>
        At the same time, they seek to <strong>Seize Responsibility</strong>. They
        seek positions of responsibility where they can earn fame and respect for
        their actions. Yes, they attempt to right wrongs (when they can admit them),
        but they prefer do so at the rudder rather than the oars. For Those Above,
        responsibility is not something bestowed upon you, it's something you stand up
        and take on.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        Those Above the Sky followed <strong>The Starlit Way</strong> to reach their
        current position, using the path of Reagents to draw power from the fount of
        Alchemy. An art of insight, augury, and strategy, this is what guided them
        beyond the world, and what let their now-distant cousins retake their
        homeland. Walkers on the Way have been known to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Brew potions of invisibility and intangibility</li>
        <li>Heal with elixirs and draw poison from wounds with crystals</li>
        <li>
          Set specks of star-stone into a flat wrist-mounted orrery for divination
        </li>
        <li>
          Build dozens of warrior-automata, then miniaturize and bottle them, ready to
          be deployed at a moment's notice
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        Suggested Expressions: Healing, Precognition, Psychometry, Spirit-Walking,
        Transcendence, Transmutation, Universal Repositories
      </p>
      <p>
        To keep their homes in working order in such a hostile environment,
        <strong>The Home-builder's Art</strong> is employed. It walks the path of Geometry to the
        fount of Elementalism. Practitioners draw architectural patterns to conjure
        new structures, some of which they live in, some of which they use to encase
        or adjust the Attic Lines. It predicts fluxes in power, determines the source
        of new flows, and lets the citizens protect their forms. A well-practiced
        Home-builder might:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Scribe a perfect square that lifts a cube of stone out of a mountain
        </li>
        <li>Trace geometric spirals that emit breathable air</li>
        <li>
          Redirect flow via perfectly symmetrical formulae inscribed over and over
        </li>
        <li>
          Drop a rope embroidered with mathematical expressions that becomes a mystic
          circle, turning its bearer into an elemental being
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Deconjuration, Null
        Tolerance, Shapeshifting, Telekinesis, Warding
      </p>
      <p>
        The Home-Builder's Art is much more heavily employed in this day and age, but
        The Starlit Way is not uncommon. It provides foresight and communication,
        which Those Above the Sky badly need if they are to stay intact as a
        civilization.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>Two to four nouns in succession, hyphenated.</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Nouns of prosperity. Coin. Wealth. Home. Owner. Keeper.</li>
        <li>Nouns of the sky or space. Sky. Star. Void.</li>
        <li>Nouns of power or magic. Flow. Leyline. Spell. Caster. Might.</li>
        <li>
          Nouns of authority, ambition, or power. King. Queen. Coup. Need. Seeker.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        Combined, these produce names like Star-Coin, Void-Flow-Prince, or Cloud-Need.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Flow Merchant</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Alone 3, Seize Responsibility 3, One Thaum One Vote 3 <br />
        Natures: C3, I4, M2, S2, T3, W2 <br />
        Professions: Merchant 3, Scholar (Elementalism) 2, Prolocutor 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Home-builder’s Art [Guising, Knotwork, the Shell Game, Travel]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Explorer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Alone 4, Seize Responsibility 2, Into the Darkness 4 <br />
        Natures: C3, I5, M4, S4, T2, W3 <br />
        Professions: Spacer 3, Theurge (Alchemy) 2, Explorer 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Starlit Way [Farspeech, Healing, Precognition, Transcendence,
        Travel, Universal Repositories], The Home-builder’s Art [Conjuration, Null
        Tolerance]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Maintenance Engineer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Alone 2, Seize Responsibility 2, Caution 4 <br />
        Natures: C2, I5, M4, S2, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Theurge (Elementalism) 3, Samaritan 2, Spacer 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Home-builder’s Art [Conjuration, Deconjuration, Distillation,
        Tailored Canon, Telekinesis]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Reagent Farmer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Alone 4, Seize Responsibility 2, Be Prepared 3 <br />
        Natures: C2, I4, M2, S3, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Farmer 3, Scholar (Alchemy) 2, Merchant 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Home-builder’s Art [Cloning, Distillation, Nature-work,
        Tailored Canon]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="The Unroyal" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="unroyal">The Unroyal</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        Long ago, in a distant part of the Kaleidoscope, a powerful family had magical
        powers that they used to enslave a hundred thousand people. They walked from
        world to world through wild magic zones and nightmarish Dream Realms, so that
        their captives found the outside world horrible and dangerous. They stole
        their slaves' freedom, their dignity, and sometimes even their very thoughts,
        all so that they could live in luxury. They called themselves the Royals.
      </p>
      <p>
        Then, one glorious day, their reign ended. Thousands of people snapped out of
        mind control. Tens of thousands more drank the wild magic like cold pure water
        and rained angry fire on their oppressors. Some of the Royals no doubt
        escaped, but their control had been broken, and the so-called “common folk”
        were free. Free, and surging with unexpected and uncomprehended power.
      </p>
      <p>
        They banded together and named themselves the Unroyal in defiance of their
        former rulers. Slowly they learned the magic of their oppressors in addition
        to their own, turning it to righteousness and introspection rather than excess
        and domination. After decades of seeking through the Dream Realms, they
        returned home to their own world, the Great Basin of humanity. They worked to
        free those trapped beneath the yolk of the ruthless and the powerful. They
        worked to teach love and respect, to sue for freedom when they could and fight
        for it when they could not, so that no one would ever suffer what they had.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        Unlike the Hearth-kin, the Unroyal have been back in the Basin for over three
        hundred years already. They've had time to sculpt a homeland – but they
        haven't done it in the Basin. Instead, they've done it in the Dream Realms.
        The Unroyal find worlds that share their goals and partner with them. They
        bring oppressed people out of the most dangerous parts of the Kaleidoscope,
        and into the safety of a carefully cultivated set of Dream Realms. In less
        persecuted lands, they help to build up infrastructure, teach sorcery, and
        enable self-reliance.
      </p>
      <p>
        An Unroyal is judged on their deeds, which is part of why their names
        incorporate those actions. Individuals who have achieved similar things in the
        past might work together to achieve greater goals, or they might seek out
        people with different achievements in order to diversify and tackle new
        challenges. Someone who hasn't accomplished anything worthy yet (and what
        counts as “worthy” is up for debate) will find themselves recruited for their
        raw potential in some courts and rejected because of their lack of expertise
        in others.
      </p>
      <p>
        Because their civilization's heart is located beyond the physical world, much
        of the Unroyal's arts are focused on things they can bring with them into the
        Basin. They often use relics and enchanted objects that funnel wild magic or
        represent their beliefs. Most of their magical infrastructure is emotionally
        oriented, using elemental resonances or glorious transubstantiation to cross
        the gap between the physical and the ephemeral.
      </p>

      <h3>Life Among the Unroyal</h3>
      <p>
        While many of the Unroyal are “in the field” (by which they usually mean the
        Great Basin), their home is a set of Dream Realms. Places like Kharadesh of
        the Unbroken Mind, Murathame: Orphan's Respite, or U'tu the Peasant's Glorious
        Sunrise harbor thousands or millions of Unroyal, along with those they have
        liberated.
      </p>
      <p>
        Cities in this territory are drawn from the imagination of those who live in
        them. They look like many settlements in the Basin, which is to say, many of
        them all at once. Each person’s imagination tries to build an entire city from
        faded memories. Buildings, blocks, and neighborhoods repeat in psychedelic
        patterns part-cubist and part-fractal. It’s easy to get where you’re going,
        but you’ll never be sure quite how you got there.
      </p>
      <p>
        In the Basin, Unroyals typically conjure temporary shelters or live off the
        land. Some disconnect from Industry, though this limits their ability to help
        others or use the Travel lattice. They build few cities here, and the ones
        they do are often in remote locations or on the edge of Null Zones.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children are comparatively rare amongst the Unroyal. They hesitate to bring
        them into a dangerous world. Children are given much more self-direction than
        in other civilizations, and most leave home for a time early in adolescence.
        Many return.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Unroyal are a representative democracy. Governors direct cities, Premiers
        direct Dream Realms.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Chaos, Change, Confusion, Courage, Freedom,
        Passion, Service, Teamwork, Worry
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: The Living Pantheon</h3>
      <p>
        During their long subjugation, the public personas of individual Unroyals were
        designated by the Royals. This included not only dress, but behavior: outgoing
        or timid, active or retiring, rough or tender, in ways that matched the
        Royals' own societal roles. The Royals could be very particular about this,
        punishing their slaves for acting out of character, and assigning roles that
        they themselves found demeaning.
      </p>
      <p>
        After they obtained their freedom, most Unroyals felt uncomfortable in these
        roles. To free their minds, they put forth their own heroes, and sought out
        archetypes from other cultures, creating a vast array of new ways to think and
        be. They call this the Living Pantheon. It is “living” not in the sense that
        its members can change over time (though they do), but because the Unroyals
        themselves live those lives and inhabit those roles.
      </p>
      <p>
        Many Unroyal follow in the steps of one of the Living Pantheon. They take on
        that role the way one might taste a fine chocolate or try on a silk shirt,
        savoring it, deciding whether it fits them. They weigh the archetype against
        their inner selves, and if the fit is not quite right, they move on to a new
        role. Their bodies, postures, and self-expressions often change to fit.
        Outsiders often assume they're dealing with the same person they met last
        year, when really someone else is inhabiting the role they once held.
        (Unroyals are quick to clear up such mistakes, lest they cause bigger
        problems.) Someone who initially presents as hyper-masculine might be
        awkwardly effeminate a year later, or gracefully feminine, or masculine in a
        more compassionate way. A timid person might take on a brash persona after a
        few months, or might become even more reclusive.
      </p>
      <p>
        Early on, most Unroyals quickly settled into positions and roles where they
        were comfortable. A hundred years later, as the truth of immortality began to
        set in, the Unroyals embraced role-changing as a way to keep their minds
        flexible. Most Unroyals follow such archetypes for a few months or years at a
        time before trying something new.
      </p>
      <p>
        In some ways, these changes (and their own overly busy lives) can blind the
        Unroyals to the plight of others. When someone complains that they aren't able
        to do what they want because of their role in society, an Unroyal citizen is
        likely to suggest that people change who they are rather than to deal with a
        societal issue. If it's not tyranny, it's not so big that you can't change
        yourself to handle it. It takes an Unroyal some extra time to remember that
        other people value a long-term static self, and would rather improve its lot
        than take on a more fluid identity.
      </p>

      <aside title="Members of the Living Pantheon">
        <h3 id="living_pantheon">Members of the Living Pantheon</h3>

        <p>
          The Cipher, who seeks hidden knowledge but reveals it only carefully.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Dying Wanderer, once-sacrificed, whose home is lost, who asks no aid but
          turns down no offers.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Grasping Wind, who seeks to involve themselves in all things great and
          small.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Heart and the Hand, who works and loves, who reaches out to those hurt.
        </p>
        <p>
          The One-Winged Angel, judgmental harbinger of doom, who breaks the world to
          show it contempt.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Precocious Child, who sees through false complexity with unexpected
          wisdom but struggles to stand alone.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Thief of the Unwanted, who quietly relieves people of those things that
          bring them no joy.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Upside-Down, to whom everything odd is beloved and all things ordinary
          seem like they could use a change.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Velvet Gauntlet, who holds power in ways gentle and soft but
          unyeilding. Feel free to add additional members to the pantheon in your
          game.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3>Spotlight: Courage and Service</h3>
      <p>
        Being Unroyal requires a certain amount of grit. Their children learn it at a
        young age – along with the difference between tenacity and just plain
        stubbornness. They also learn the importance of service. There's no way that
        the Unroyal are going to rid the Basin of tyranny without everyone working
        together. While the gigantic Nova Commonwealth scatters its seeds far and
        wide, and mighty Diadem wastes the majority of its citizens' talents,
        comparatively small Unroyal makes sure that everyone's pulling in the same
        direction.
      </p>
      <p>
        Children among the Unroyal are taught teamwork as a means to an end. They
        don't have to love it, but it's how you get things done. One common metaphor
        is that when you want to shine bright, teamwork is the only oil for that lamp.
        Not all Unroyals enjoy cooperation, but all of them value it.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most teams amongst the Unroyal don't have a single leader. With people taking
        on new personae on a regular basis, you can't rely solely on strong or
        compatible personalities to hold things together. Instead, they have experts
        for various situations. Being an expert is considered its own kind of service:
        when people need what you know, you can't stubbornly hang on to a personality
        that's counterproductive. You need to step up now, and if you need to bow out
        gracefully, you wait for the danger to be over.
      </p>

      <aside title="Exfiltration">
        <h3 id="exfiltration">Exfiltration</h3>

        <p>
          Even in a world with Travel and conjuration, there are governments that
          exert oppressive control over their people, forcing them to labor for next
          to nothing and making it hard for them to leave. In the Unroyals’ crusade
          against tyranny, they smuggle people out of those places.
        </p>
        <p>
          They’re very careful about it. They don’t go around kidnapping unwilling
          people off the street, even in the worst nations. (Well, some do, but it’s
          rare.) Instead, they work with locals. Parents want to find safe, free homes
          for their children. Dissidents need respite from those who would chase them
          down. Those who wouldn’t be missed are often eager to leave.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Unroyal have patterned some of their tactics in the Basin after myths
          and legends of the “fair folk”, trickster creatures from beyond the world.
          This lets them hide their behavior more effectively in this world where only
          the superstitious believe in such things – their stories are scoffed at by
          “more reasonable people”.
        </p>
        <p>
          Diadem’s underclass is a prime target for Unroyal exfiltration operations.
          Diadem knows it, but hasn’t been able to effectively stop them yet.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>A life of symbolism and allegory</li>
        <li>Wind and thunder presage danger</li>
        <li>Well-traveled allies from distant lands</li>
        <li>Strange occurrences that flout probability</li>
        <li>Councils with the great spirits of the Basin</li>
        <li>Jewelry and tattoos that represent their beliefs</li>
        <li>Visitors and refugees from a hundred different realms</li>
        <li>Bottles full of chaotic flow for use when things are dire</li>
        <li>Events conspire to make random occurrences into stories</li>
        <li>Mirrors that store the viewer's magical signature and intentions</li>
        <li>
          Ever-changing cities powered by wild magic and the strength of conviction
        </li>
        <li>
          Paths that lead wanderers to the destination their heart desires – or
          deserves
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        Just because the Gift frees all living beings from mind control doesn't mean
        no one can subjugate you. There are a thousand ways to control, all of them
        bad. <strong>Let No One Reign</strong>. You can work with someone, you can go
        with a vote you don't agree with, you can even take orders if you think
        someone knows better than you, but you do <strong>not</strong> bow your head –
        nor ask anyone to bow their head to you. The age of kings should be over, and
        the Unroyal will be the first people to tell you that the Interregnum is far
        from done.
      </p>
      <p>
        Knocking down tyrants is only a start. Despots and bullies succeed by holding
        others down in a hierarchy of oppression. It is your role to
        <strong>Lend Your Strength</strong> to those most in need. Trust them to know
        what they need, and be their accomplices as they break free of subjugation.
        This world of infinite potential needs no underclasses.
      </p>
      <p>
        Note that many Unroyals have the
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#expertise">Archetypal Expertise</a>, linked to
        their current choice in the Living Pantheon. This will grant them an
        appropriate Core Value when its Professions are in use.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        The first magic of the Unroyal was <strong>The Key of Freedom</strong>, which
        walks the path of Wild Magic to the fount of Earthpower. It is a personal and
        an interpersonal art, whether that means communication or battle or
        self-understanding. Importantly, it is <strong>never impersonal</strong>. The
        practitioner is never merely a conduit for power. Instead, the power is
        connected to who they are, have been, and will be. It uses the body as a
        metaphor for the soul and the emotions. Bearers of the Key of Freedom have
        been known to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>Move with the roiling flow of battle to pull meteors from the sky</li>
        <li>
          Carefully piece together a Rapport by resonating with another's flow
        </li>
        <li>
          Listen to the wind and the weather to understand what is coming for them
          tomorrow
        </li>
        <li>
          Adapt to local spaces: become quiet in a quiet place, or hard and gnarled in
          a grove of ancient trees
        </li>
        <li>
          Use the flow of pain and suffering to call to the energy of healing, letting
          people transform themselves in moments of hardship to what they wish they
          had been
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Energy Waves, Expanded
        Expertise (Archetypal), Healing, Shapeshifting, Transcendence, Weather-working
      </p>
      <p>
        The art that the Unroyals took from their captors was
        <strong>The Key of Courage</strong>, which walks the path of Belief to the
        fount of Glory. It requires a Core Value pertaining to hierarchy, control, and
        command. The Unroyal's own Let No One Reign CV is most common, but any
        interpretation of those concepts will do. Bearers of the Key of Courage use it
        to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Use their own unquenchable nature to prevent the haughty from noticing them
        </li>
        <li>
          Trap a curse in a metaphorical labyrinth made of the strength of one's
          convictions
        </li>
        <li>
          Understand the Travel lattice's relationship to power, and thereby open it
        </li>
        <li>
          Recite catechisms to raise a wall of thunder between the worthy and the
          unworthy
        </li>
        <li>
          Use a captive's desire for freedom to open gateways to the Dream Realms
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Curses, Dream Travel, Dreamshaping,
        Travel, Warding
      </p>
      <p>
        The Key of Courage has been substantially reinvented and altered since its
        early days. A tool of oppression and control has been converted into a means
        to achieve freedom and self-sufficiency. There were arguments early on as to
        whether the Key of Courage was appropriate to learn at all, or whether it
        would lead to repeating the mistakes of the past. Those arguments are mostly
        gone now, but there are still some who refuse to learn it because of its
        history, calling it the Key of Folly.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>Follow the pattern “(Word), who (deed)”.</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Words of freedom. Release. Liberty. Deliverance. Independence.</li>
        <li>Words of happiness. Joy. Delight. Thrill. Bliss.</li>
        <li>Words of discovery. Truth. Invention. Seeker. Verity.</li>
        <li>
          Deeds are typically short and to the point. ...who pierced the mists. ...who
          found the Iron Flame. ...who built the Grand Tower. ...who journeyed ever
          starward.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        Names typically change only when a deed is great enough, or when an old deed
        becomes irrelevant. Unroyals rarely change their own names; instead, others
        start referring to them in a new way.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Freedom Fighter</strong> <br />
        CVs: Let No One Reign 4, Lend Your Strength 4, Don’t Get Caught 3, {Be the
        Beacon 4} <br />
        Natures: C3, I3, M5, S2, T5, W4 <br />
        Professions: {Soldier 3, Magistrate 3, Spy 3, Prolocutor 3, Criminal 3},
        Samaritan 3, Healer 2, Explorer 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Key of Freedom [Energy Wave, Expanded Expertise (Archetypal),
        the Shroud, Spirit-walking, Travel, Weaponry]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Dream Realm Shaper</strong> <br />
        CVs: Let No One Reign 2, Lend Your Strength 3, Home is Where the Heart is 3
        <br />
        Natures: C4, I4, M2, S4, T3, W3
        <br />
        Professions: Theurge (Oneiromancy) 3, Art (Architecture, Geography) 2, Teacher
        1 <br />
        Tradition: The Key of Courage [Dream Travel, Dreamshaping, the Shell Game]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Agent Provacateur</strong> <br />
        CVs: Let No One Reign 3, Lend Your Strength 3, The Subtle Hand Grips Tightest
        4 <br />
        Natures: C3, I3, M5, S3, T5, W3
        <br />
        Professions: Spy 3, Criminal 2, Law (Diadem) 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Key of Freedom [Conjuration, Guising, Red Space, Shapeshifting,
        Transcendence]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Nanny</strong> <br />
        CVs: Let No One Reign 2, Lend Your Strength 3, Children Are the Future 5
        <br />
        Natures: C5, I3, M3, S5, T3, W2 <br />
        Professions: Teacher 3, Magistrate 2, Artist (Painting, Singing) 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Key of Courage [Dreamshaping, Healing, Rapport, Warding]
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="The Worldbuilders" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="worldbuilders">The Worldbuilders</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>The origin of the Worldbuilders is in great dispute.</p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        The Worldbuilders are an alliance of city-states spread across a long
        coastline and the surrounding lands. They are quite widely scattered, and in
        fact some Worldbuilder city-states have been discovered nestled within nearby
        nations, hidden on high plateaus, deep under lakes, or in inhospitable
        deserts. They appear in hard-to-find locales that were once considered
        uninhabitable.
      </p>
      <p>
        Worldbuilder cities spread very quickly. They employ terraforming arts to
        reformat the land at the edge of their territory into a beautiful (if
        eclectic) cityscape, complete with parks, fountains, utilities, and more. This
        expansion is easiest for them near existing ruins, because their terraforming
        selectively brings buildings forward through time and restore them to their
        original pristine state. With the Basin's billions of years of history,
        there's always a ruined city to be found if you dig far back enough.
      </p>
      <p>
        When the Worldbuilders alter a land, they generally don't ask permission. They
        simply move ahead and begin the process. If someone mounts a strenuous enough
        opposition, they roll back time until before they started and build in a
        different direction. Individuals in the affected area during the rollback
        remember both the original timeline and the rewritten one. However, those
        outside the affected area (whether inside a Worldbuilder city-state or halfway
        across the Basin) don't know about anything but the final sequence of events.
        Ideally only a small group of Worldbuilders within the affected area will
        remember every timeline, so that they can direct the terraforming
        appropriately.
      </p>
      <p>
        This practice is what erased the Worldbuilders' understanding of their own
        origins. They retroactively destroyed any evidence of the nation they once
        were. All that's left now is a thousand tangled timelines.
      </p>

      <h3>Life Among the Worldbuilders</h3>
      <p>
        Mornings are active in a Worldbuilder city. Water is heated for guarana and
        mate, and the day begins with work.
      </p>
      <p>
        Adults (age 15 and above in the Worldbuilders) are expected to hold jobs that
        help with the advancedment of the civilization. In many cases this means
        construction, via conjuration, timeshifting, telekinesis, and other direct
        measures. Those too young to work learn, often through apprenticeship.
        Construction can be a dangerous job, so there are healers. Planning is
        important; there are architects and engineers and seers. Explorers seek new
        sites, and diplomats coordinate the disparate city-states to populate new
        settlements.
      </p>
      <p>
        Worldbuilders consider themselves primarily to be citizens of their local
        city-state. Many identify more with their society and gender than with the
        Worldbuilders as a whole. With their empire being large and thinly spread,
        only the Worldbuilders' magical traditions serve to unify the civilization as
        a whole. Most people feel a much greater commonality with the people who live
        down the street than with those who live on distant continents, even if
        they're really just a Travel-hop away.
      </p>
      <p>
        Stereotypes in the Worldbuilders thus revolve around one's home city, and to a
        lesser extent around gender and education. Citizens have definite opinions
        about most other cities they know. When meeting outsiders, they'll try to
        ferret out their home city’s reputation, even if that's not how that
        civilization views things.
      </p>
      <p>
        With their explosive expansion into city after city, the Worldbuilders have
        taken to recruiting their own descendants from the future for assistance. Many
        are attracted by the opportunity to work with the founders of their
        civilization. Not only do they speed the process of reconstruction and city
        planning (since they know what things will cause problems) they also play
        major roles in establishing the culture of each city. These recruits, known as
        “successors”, generally do not return to their own time – instead, they come
        as groups and families, moving into the past for the long haul.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each city-state rules itself as it chooses. Most are representative
        democracies or oligarchies. They send ambassadors to a central city, Lorshier,
        to vote on binding and non-binding referendums. Each city-state is on its own
        when it comes to dealing with local Unruly Lands.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Common Aspects</strong>: Community, Flame, Industry, Order, Planning,
        River, Stone, Time, Wind
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Nature Spirits</h3>
      <p>
        The Great Basin is a place of wonder and magic, where many important places
        are homes to spirits. Instead of offering tribute and friendship to nature
        spirits, the Worldbuilders offer them power.
      </p>
      <p>
        Worldbuilder magic drags the cities of the past into the present. It
        overwrites the terrain of the Basin. Trees, glaciers, sands, and more are all
        wiped away in favor of ancient dwellings.
      </p>
      <p>
        When an area is terraformed this way, powerful local spirits who complain are
        offered a choice. The Worldbuilders can roll back the change and the world
        will be as it was, or the spirit can stay, be transformed, and become an ally
        to a powerful and fast-expanding civilization.
      </p>
      <p>
        Spirits who choose to stay what they were usually return to rest (sometimes
        resentfully), deep in the ground and far up in the sky. Those who “join the
        cause” are given substantial resources and enjoy the veneration of thousands.
        They transcend what they were, via their will and the rituals of the
        Worldbuilders, and become city-gods of an ever-growing empire. Some of these
        transformed spirits just want to show up old rivals. Others want a voice in
        where the Basin is headed. All of them are ambitious.
      </p>
      <p>
        The places that the Worldbuilders call forward were once occupied by spirits
        now long dead – city-mothers, glade-fathers, river-captains. Each small god
        had its place, and those places provided some of the form and personality of
        those beings. While the gods themselves are not pulled forward, modern spirits
        who accept the Worldbuilders' offer often end up taking on some of the
        characteristics of these more ancient beings.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Community</h3>
      <p>
        Each civilization has its outlets for extroverts. The Guild has social clubs.
        The Hearth-kin have taverns. Worldbuilders have neighborhood centers.
      </p>
      <p>
        People bring their friends, families, and loved ones out into streets and
        alleys, rooftops and communal gardens. The Worldbuilders' cities are sparsely
        populated, but everyone knows where to go when it's time to relax. They play
        sports, or referee for their children (or, in some cases, ancestors). They
        talk about the week. They cook food, not because they can't conjure it, but
        because it feels good. There's a real sense of community in every
        neighborhood.
      </p>
      <p>
        Not everyone’s an extrovert, and community isn't limited to crowded in-person
        events. The Worldbuilders are famous for innovative uses of the Universal
        Repositories. People write short stories back and forth to each other,
        publishing indexes of them so that others can read them. Sometimes these carry
        on for years on end, with multiple people using the same characters in
        different ways. There are enormous books, massive tomes, that are nothing but
        discussions of these things, with the marginalia trailing on extensively. The
        fact that there are thousands of alternate future versions only incites
        further debate.
      </p>

      <aside title="Adjacency and the City-State">
        <h3 id="city_state">Adjacency and the City-State</h3>

        <p>
          <a href="Magic.xhtml#Travel">Travel</a> makes every land adjacent to every other – and also
          adjacent to unpopulated places. Distance no longer provides protection, and
          cities in the mountains are just as easy to invade (and impossible to siege)
          as those on flat plains.
        </p>
        <p>
          As a reaction to this, the city-state has become the standard “building
          block” of the civilization. Cities are typically no more than five koss wide
          – the distance at which Travel becomes faster than flight or walking. The
          next city over could be from the same civilization, or from a completely
          different one. Pure physical territory is not as valuable as flow resources,
          and nations reach ever toward the Basin’s hub and toward rare or powerful
          sources of aspect.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Cult of the Empty Grave is an exception to this – their lands are so
          riddled with death-aspected flow that few other nations desire to build
          there. Even so, their rulership over the Black Sand Desert is not absolute,
          and other nations are known to have hidden cities secreted away in its
          sands.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>Children are born intersex</li>
        <li>A jumble of architectural styles</li>
        <li>Women scout and direct; men build</li>
        <li>Cities in dangerous or remote locations</li>
        <li>Strenuous arguments between close friends</li>
        <li>New towers rising in the distance with each new dawn</li>
        <li>Everyone has a job, and nearly all of them revolve around the city</li>
        <li>Work crews reshaping buildings for greater symmetry and utility</li>
        <li>
          Visitors browbeaten into actions to which they might not normally agree
        </li>
        <li>
          Frequent holidays, each spent venerating one of a vast pantheon of powerful
          local spirits
        </li>
        <li>
          The ever-evolving Great Plan by which the Worldbuilders work to build their
          place in the Basin
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        The Worldbuilders know how to be relentless. Other cultures see them as
        stubborn, with all the pros and cons that come with that. Worldbuilders prefer
        to see it as knowing how to <strong>Stand Again</strong> when someone knocks
        you down. If your plan fails, try again. If someone gives you a no, keep
        asking.
      </p>
      <p>
        Worldbuilders also <strong>Prize the Future</strong>. This is one of the roots
        of their terraforming strategy: they realize that the Great Basin is finite,
        and lifespans are not. If their children are going to have places to live,
        they need to start claiming those places now. The Worldbuilders aren't looking
        to colonize the entire Basin, but they're hoping for over half of it. Not
        every Worldbuilder plan is quite so ambitious, but they do appreciate having
        things to do and an active approach to take.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        When the Worldbuilders' time-shifting magic delves into the past, it calls on
        the soul of the world itself, the ghosts of the hills and the specters of lost
        cities. This is <strong>Parelthonia</strong>, which uses both Artistry and
        Geometry (especially drafting and architecture) to evoke the power of
        Necromancy. Its masters use this power to:
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Draw the land in chalk as it was in the past and make it so in the present
        </li>
        <li>
          Carve a simple line across the landscape to strike with murderous force
        </li>
        <li>Trace a portrait of an ancestor to take on some of their traits</li>
        <li>
          Sketch a strange, impossible place in rare pigments, and then burn it to
          move from this world into another
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Conjuration, Dream Travel,
        Precognition, the Ten Crore Stones, Travel, the Uncountable Spinners
      </p>
      <p>
        Characters who practice Parelthonia pay the Import/Reserve cost for having an
        extra Path, even though they are in the same Tradition.
      </p>
      <p>
        As they reformat the land, the Worldbuilders also make deals with nature
        spirits. Those who would rather become city-gods are their Patrons, who
        empower them with Elementalism. This is an art they call
        <strong>Symmachis</strong>. A Worldbuilder might call upon...
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          The Lamplighter, to light a path or project mind-twisting patterns of flame
        </li>
        <li>
          The Flag-whip, who reveals cloud patterns that can shift one's body into air
          itself
        </li>
        <li>
          The Hundred-faceted Eyes of Stone, to produce crystals with ornate magical
          etchings that reveal secrets
        </li>
        <li>
          The Pharaoh of the Avenues, whose intricately-woven city streets direct
          flows of health and vigor to heal the weak
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>Suggested Expressions</strong>: Curses, Healing, Multitasking,
        Shapeshifting, Transcendence, Weather-working
      </p>
      <p>
        Nearly all Worldbuilders know both of these Traditions. Some even combine them
        into a single mega-Tradition with a single set of Core Expressions. They might
        open a window into the past with Parelthonia and give the ghostly phantoms
        they see forms with Symmachis. They might take on forms of burrowing or
        swimming creatures with Symmachis, but use Parelthonia to make them into
        ancient forms now extinct.
      </p>
      <p>
        Because of the way that the Worldbuilders train their citizens, women tend to
        be better at Symmachis for its applications to exploration and prediction, and
        men tend to be more familiar with Parelthonia for its building applications.
        You may decide for yourself whether to represent this in your character's
        attributes.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        The (word) that (description of action). Often shortened to just the initial
        word, or even just its first syllable.
      </p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          The words for men typically revolve around building, artistry, death, or the
          past.
        </li>
        <li>
          The words for women typically revolve around scribing, discovery, nature, or
          the future.
        </li>
        <li>
          Actions are typically related to people's jobs, but many are poetic and
          evocative. There's often a bit of a riddle or joke as to how exactly it
          describes their work.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        A few examples: The Hunter who Finds the Truth (Hunt). The Circle that Draws
        Itself (Circ). The Ghost that Wakes the Land (Ghost). The Tower that Rises
        Again (Tow).
      </p>
      <p>
        People who change jobs often change their entire name rather than just part of
        it. One’s employment is a part of one's identity amongst the Worldbuilders.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Retroarchitect</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Again 4, Prize the Future 2, Seek and Ye Shall Find 4 <br />
        Natures: C3, I5, M2, S3, T2, W2 <br />
        Professions: Theurge (Necromancy) 3, Historian 2, Artist (Drawing,
        Architecture) 1 Tradition: Parelthonia [Conjuration, Precognition,
        Psychmoetry], Symmachis [Multitasking, Weather-working]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Scout</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Again 2, Prize the Future 4, Check It Twice 3 <br />
        Natures: C3, I2, M4, S3, T2, W3 <br />
        Professions: Explorer 3, Medium 2, Spy 1 <br />
        Tradition: Parelthonia [Conjuration, Red Space, Travel], Symmachis [Farspeech,
        Healing, Shapeshifting, Sixth Sense, Telekinesis]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Medium</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Again 4, Prize the Future 4, Offer Alternatives 3 <br />
        Natures: C5, I2, M4, S4, T4, W3 <br />
        Professions: Medium 4, Scholar (Elementalism) 4, Theurge (Elementalism) 4,
        Prolocutor 3, Scholar (Earthpower) 2, Clergy 1 <br />
        Tradition: Parelthonia [], Symmachis [Curses, Expanded Expertise (Prodigy),
        Transcendence]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Governor-Planner</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Again 3, Prize the Future 4, Listen to my Constitutents 2 <br />
        Natures: C5, I2, M3, S3, T5, W2 <br />
        Professions: Politician 3, Historian 2, Explorer 1 <br />
        Tradition: Parelthonia [Dream Travel, Hypnopraxis, Precognition, Rapport,
        Travel], Symmachis [Multitasking, Weather-working]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>New Arrival</strong> <br />
        CVs: Stand Again 4, Prize the Future 3, Learn the Lessons of History 3 <br />
        Natures: C3, I3, M3, S3, T3, W3 <br />
        Professions: Teacher 3, Soldier 2, Historian 1
        <br />
        Tradition: Parelthonia [Precognition, Travel], Symmachis [Multitasking,
        Shapeshifting, Transcendence]
      </p>

    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="The Unruly Lands" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="unruly_lands">The Unruly Lands</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        Many nations of the Great Basin fell apart immediately following the Gift,
        beginning the period known as the Interregnum. Thousands upon thousands of
        nations have not yet found peace. These states undergo constant upheaval,
        warring with one another, raising terrifying defenses as their governments
        fail, or hiding in hopes of survival.
      </p>
      <p>
        Much of the status quo in these lands is thanks to the actions of previous
        civilizations. The Army of Unity and the Universal Consortium fought proxy
        wars with one another, propping up one nation against another. The
        law-and-justice-oriented Guardhouse took issue with the free and unrestrained
        Legion of the Incomparable, and fought them for decades across continents.
        Rulers were propped up, knocked down, paid off, and undermined. It demolished
        the citizenry's confidence in their own rulers and the trust of outsiders.
        Military actions also polluted the local flow with aspects of strife, battle,
        and treachery. This makes it even harder to break the cycle.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        Resources vary wildly from land to land. Nations low on Industry still mine
        and log their lands. Certain aspects of flow are hard to come by. Rare
        mystical gemstones like moxes and cintamani have often been mined out dozens
        or hundreds of years ago by interlopers, and will take decades more to
        replenish. Those Above charge heavy prices for new ley lines of
        carefully-aspected flow, and the cost has left more than one nation in
        inescapable debt.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each land is ruled differently. Monarchy and oligarchy are common. To this
        day, rulers in these lands often rise quickly and are deposed just as quickly.
        Sometimes this is the result of internal squabbles. Equally often, however, it
        is due to the actions of more powerful nations or civilizations, who see
        something to be gained by manipulating their less-technologically-advanced
        cousins. The Geometer's Guild empowers rulers who are favorably disposed
        toward its scholastic and cultural domination. The Hearth-kin crash into the
        Unroyals' carefully laid plans, both of them trying to overthrow the same
        tyrant. Nova researchers and Sovereign sybarites come in, do what they want,
        and leave.
      </p>

      <h3>Examples</h3>
      <p>
        Each of the Unruly Lands is a nation unto itself. Their customs, appearances,
        Core Values, and Traditions vary from nation to nation. Some examples are
        given below.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Bight and the Brand</strong> – A fractious kingdom divided along
        gender lines, with men as warriors and explorers, and women as healers and
        researchers. They believe that a terrible Dark One will return to destroy the
        world. CVs: Prepare For Battle, Seek Balance. <br />
        Tradition: The Power, Belief → Elementalism
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Ever Starward</strong> – Here on the very edge of the Basin, the ships
        built on the shores of nothingness sail the airless void and its strange
        islands, where there is much glory and treasure to be found. CVs: Show No
        Fear, Exploration. <br />
        Tradition: The Wind And The Sail, Reagents → Alchemy
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Blasted Sea</strong> – Someone's wars turned water to silt, and
        this scorching desert-sea is sailed across by odd ships and filled with odder
        fish. Vicious god-kings provide their templars with power. Giant cloud-rays
        float through the sky. The weather obeys no magic. CVs: Survival Is All, Take
        What Is Yours. <br />
        Tradition: Authority, Patrons → Elementalism and Patrons → Glory
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Shore and Glade</strong> – An outwardly peaceful land, but one where
        children are tempted away from their homes by beautiful and dangerous
        creatures, and armies raid from some strange world. The inhabitants have
        rallied in the past, but never won, and are terrified of retribution. CVs:
        Honor the Fair Folk, Hide That Which You Value. <br />
        Tradition: The Knack, Artistry → Glory
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Spines</strong> – Instead of living together in fragile
        settlements, the people of this land are spread across a thousand different
        places. Only by Travel do they connect with one another, and in truth some of
        them spend almost as much time on the bridges of the Lattice as they do in the
        Basin. CVs: Many Eggs in Many Baskets, Keep a Watch. <br />
        Tradition: The Keys, Language → Oneiromancy.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Clawed Land</strong> – Questing warrior-wizards awoke a thousand
        dragons, who were none too pleased to discover that they had not received the
        full portion of the Gift. The land is marked by frequent wars between humanity
        and its scaled opponents. CVs: Trust No Dragon, Hold The Line.
        <br />
        Tradition: Sorcery of the Towers, Language → Glory.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Mists</strong> – An ancient ward that kept intruders at bay has
        been reversed, and now this fog-covered land is almost impossible to leave.
        Undead creatures come here to escape destruction elsewhere and then become
        enraged that they cannot get out. CVs: Watch Your Back, Hope is an Anchor.
        <br />
        Tradition: The Foul Art, Blood Magic → Necromancy.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Dissonance</strong> – Humanity shares this mountainous realm with
        uplifted animals, all of whom also have the Gift. A queen sends knights and
        explorers out to explore and find allies. They seek peace but are unable to
        find it between their warring neighbors. CVs: All Life is Worthy, Beware
        Power. <br />
        Tradition: Mentalism, Discipline (mind) → Oneiromancy.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Peoples of the Great Basin</h3>
      <p>
        The Great Basin is home to a wide range of humanity. Some peoples and cultures
        are widespread, while other groups barely reach beyond a single civilization.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most of the Basin's inhabitants have skin in the brown-to-black range, with
        warm undertones. Their naturally black hair can be anywhere from thin and
        wispy to thick and curly. Many have changed their hair color. Most eyes are
        brown, though children often have blue eyes. Birthmarks are common, and they
        appear in bright shades of red, orange, and yellow.
      </p>
      <p>
        There are many variations on this from one land to another. The ancient
        forests of the Sovereigns' continent are home to a taller people whose skin
        tends more toward clay, with faint striations passed on in family lines. The
        Worldbuilders count many islanders in their population, whose skin is closer
        to terra cotta. Diadem's mountain-dwelling citizenry retain their blue eyes
        into adulthood, and their hair goes grey by age thirty.
      </p>
      <p>
        All of the Basin's civilizations are heterogeneous from their beginnings. They
        continue to be so as people and families move from one group to another.
      </p>
      <p>There are no game effects from being of a particular race or ethnicity.</p>

      <h3 id="residuum">Spotlight: Linguistic Residuum</h3>
      <p>
        The Gift changed everything about day-to-day life. The effects of the
        Communion-Nature, in particular, changed how people communicate with one
        another. Suddenly the desire for conversation was, in and of itself,
        sufficient to provide communication.
      </p>
      <p>
        Even through the <a href="Magic.xhtml#The_True_Speech">True Speech</a>, habits of speech and metaphors are
        still present, as well as accents. Cultists of the Empty Grave sound
        old-fashioned because their language uses idioms drawn from the Black Sand
        Architects' thousand-year-old tongue. The Golden Ægis speak with metaphors
        that, even in translation, can still seem like overwrought purple prose. The
        Unroyal use complex and circuitous verbiage, whilst Nova citizens speak in a
        direct, straightforward tongue that reveals its origin as a trade pidgin. Most
        people refer to all these things an “accent”, though the Guild formally deems
        it Linguistic Residuum.
      </p>
      <p>
        This manner of speech is one of the ways that people know they're talking to
        someone from the Unruly Lands. When someone doesn't talk about magic in the
        Guild's lexicon, when they use phrases that almost match a civilization's
        name, when they use weird metaphors that no one's ever heard of, it's a
        giveaway that they're “not from around here”.
      </p>

      <h3 id="civ_or_ul">Civilization or Unruly Land?</h3>

      <p>
        No civilization's hands are clean. Every civilization meddles in the Unruly
        Lands.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong> And every civilization is an Unruly Land.</strong>
      </p>
      <p>
        There is no true difference between “the civilizations” and the rest of the
        Basin. There is no inferiority that is somehow inherent to the so-called
        Unruly Lands, and no instability there that the larger and wealthier
        civilizations do not own. The Unruly Lands are just nations like any other,
        held down by bad luck, resource scarcity, and the actions of the powerful.
      </p>
      <p>
        The very terms “Unruly Lands” and “Interregnum” are a way that the major
        civilizations talk down to smaller nations, as if they too were not
        knee-deep in wars, coups, and instability.
      </p>
      <p>
        All of this is subtext in this chapter, but we wanted to pull it out here
        explicitly in case someone missed it.
      </p>

      <h3>Naming Conventions</h3>
      <p>
        When making names for groups outside of the default civilizations, or when creating your
        own civilization, you'll need to come up with a new convention. You don't need
        a lot of detail, but it will help to make something unique. Someone who
        interacts with a particular civilization often should be able to identify a
        citizen by the style of their name. Remember to draw the words in their names
        from what that culture values, or what they have valued in the past.
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Star Sailor</strong> <br />
        CVs: Show No Fear 3, Exploration 4, Make Some Side Profit 3 <br />
        Natures: C3, I4, M3, S2, T4, W3 <br />
        Professions: Explorer 3, Merchant 2, Theurge (Alchemy) 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Wind And The Sail [Curses, Energy Waves, Red Space,
        Telekinesis]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Bonded Healer</strong> <br />
        CVs: All Life is Worthy 4, Beware Power 3, Make Friends 2 <br />
        Natures: C5, I1, M3, S4, T1, W1 <br />
        Professions: Healer 3, Samaritan 2, Lawyer 1
        <br />
        Tradition: Mentalism [Dream Travel, Farspeech, Healing, Hypnopraxis, Rapport]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Templar</strong> <br />
        CVs: Survival Is All 4, Take What Is Yours 2, Glory to the God-Kings 4 <br />
        Natures: C2, I1, M2, S2, T3, W3 <br />
        Professions: Clergy 2,
        <br />
        Tradition: Authority [Curses, Energy Wave, Healing, Transmutation]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Shadow-killer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Watch Your Back 4, Hope is an Anchor 3, Only Deserving Victims 3 <br />
        Natures: C1, I3, M5, S4, T5, W3
        <br />
        Professions: Spy 3, Assassin 2, Scholar (Necromancy) 1 <br />
        Tradition: The Foul Art [Distillation, the Shroud, Soul-work, Weaponry]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Warrior-Prophet</strong> <br />
        CVs: Prepare for Battle 5, Seek Balance 4, Forge My Own Destiny 4 <br />
        Natures: C2, I4, M3, S1, T3, W5
        <br />
        Professions: Soldier 5, Theurge (Elementalism) 3, Clergy 2, Farmer 1
        <br />
        Tradition: The Power [Energy Wave, Expanded Expertise (Satori), Precognition,
        Healing, Travel]
      </p>

    </section>
    <section class="civ" title="Returner Cults" epub:type="chapter">

      <h2 id="returner_cults">Returner Cults</h2>

      <h3>History</h3>
      <p>
        When Aion's Gift spread across the world, it brought chaos, destruction, and
        death. It is any wonder so many people sought to reject it? In some places,
        entire generations taught their children to fear magic and be ashamed at their
        own potential. Those who displayed mystical talents were exiled or worse. In
        others, thousands of people moved into naturally occurring Null Zones, even
        fighting over the territory. Even when the Interregnum came to an uneven,
        stuttering end, many cultures continued to reject sorcery. The term in common
        use at this time is “Returner” – someone who would rather be able to return
        the Gift.
      </p>

      <h3>Now</h3>
      <p>
        If not for the power differential, Returner cults would be dangerous.
        Occasionally they capture someone who can't protect themselves, or manage to
        drag a more powerful group into a Null Zone with them. As it is, though, most
        other civilizations simply give them a wide berth and let them live in their
        flow-drained wastelands.
      </p>
      <p>
        Technology among the Returner cults is low. Most of them won't shun
        agriculture and the written word, though you never know. A few, mostly in Null
        Zones, have worked their way up toward steam engines, but even that seems
        untrustworthy to most cultists.
      </p>
      <p>
        Many Returner Cults are aristocracies, though some involve an elected balance
        to the hereditary rulers. Some are anarchic communes, dealing with money only
        to handle external matters.
      </p>

      <h3>Spotlight: Emotion</h3>
      <p>
        Everyone in the Basin knows that emotions are tied to magic. That's why so
        many Returner cults deny that emotions are real.
      </p>
      <p>
        Returners who live deep in Null Zones can afford to accept emotion more
        easily. When magical energy is more available, however, maturing children tend
        to manifest the Gift in instinctual, emotion-driven ways. Intent and need
        drive magical manifestations, but emotions – especially habitual or
        longstanding emotions – shape those manifestations into visible and
        comprehensible expressions of one's Nature. Emotions are the gateway to
        hundreds of Traditions and thousands of mystic techniques.
      </p>
      <p>
        Returner cults therefore teach young children to reject their feelings. The
        most common method is to simply declare that emotions are “lesser” than
        rational thoughts, which are themselves considered lesser than physical
        reality. If emotions are “just emotions”, then taming or ignoring them can be
        presented as easy. Admitting to one's emotions, or especially displaying them,
        is considered shameful across many Returner cults.
      </p>

      <h3>Hallmarks</h3>
      <ul>
        <li>The absence of magic</li>
        <li>Signs warning sorcerers away</li>
        <li>Buildings of stone, wood, and thatch.</li>
        <li>A culture that values temperance and logic</li>
        <li>Superstitious signs made against unusual events</li>
        <li>
          A distrust of any sort of power, even the purely mechanical
        </li>
      </ul>

      <h3>Core Values</h3>
      <p>
        All Returner cults have a belief that keeps them from embracing the Gift.
        Common examples are Magic is Harmful, Magic Heralds Ruin, Things Were Better
        Before, Temperance is Holy, or strict interpretations of Simplicity.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Returners' second Core Value varies from one cult to another. Many deal
        with rational thought or emotion in some way.
      </p>

      <h3>Traditions</h3>
      <p>
        Returner cults follow no magical traditions. Those who do manage to learn
        magic typically follow a Path that they can use without alerting others around
        them, such as Belief, Discipline (mind), Patrons, or Blood Magic.
      </p>

      <h3>Special Note</h3>
      <p>
        Returner cultists take no penalty for using their Professions in
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#null_zones">Null Zones</a>
      </p>

      <h3>Character Templates</h3>
      <p>
        <strong>Farmer</strong> <br />
        CVs: Trust No Mage 4, Set Aside for Tomorrow 3, Watch the Skies 3 <br />
        Natures: C1, I1, M1, S1, T1, W1 <br />
        Professions: Farmer 3, Teacher 2, Healer 1
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Soldier</strong> <br />
        CVs: Magic Heralds Ruin 2, Honor and Devotion 4, Fight for Country 4 <br />
        Natures: C1, I1, M1, S1, T1, W1 <br />
        Professions: Soldier 3, Magistrate 2, Clergy 1
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Merchant of Physical Objects</strong> <br />
        CVs: Wizards are Devious 1, Walk the Paths 3, Riches for the Bold 5 <br />
        Natures: C1, I1, M1, S1, T2, W1
        <br />
        Professions: Merchant 3, Prolocutor 2, Linguist 1 <br />
        Tradition: (none) [Becoming, Mental Acuity]
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Philosopher</strong> <br />
        CVs: All Evil Comes from Sorcery 3, Speak your Truth 2, A Good Debate 3 <br />
        Natures: C1, I1, M1, S1, T1, W1 <br />
        Professions: Scholar (Glory) 3, Historian 2,
        Teacher 1
      </p>
    </section>

  </section>


  <section class="chapter" title="Societies" epub:type="chapter">
    <h1 id="societies" class="title">Societies</h1>

    <p>
      Smaller than Civilizations are Societies, which exist across multiple
      cultures. Sometimes they are united by a particular goal, sometimes by a
      common origin. Some societies are in-game shorthand for a particular
      profession.
    </p>
    <p>
      If your character is part of a Society, you will need to maintain their Core
      Value at level 3 or higher in order to retain their benefit.
      The descriptions below also note where one can most easily
      find members of each society, and whether they teach a particular Tradition to
      their members.
    </p>

    <h2 id="archivists">Archivists</h2>
    <p>
      Longtime or particularly committed members of the
      <a href="Introduction.xhtml#the_archive">Archive</a> should
      probably have this society. Not all their employees do – this society is not a
      requirement for any character.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Knowledge for the sake of ______ (fill in your
        own reason). There is much internal disagreement in the Archive, but
        everyone feels the need to learn.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: None. Archivists bring their own native
        Traditions to their role rather than passing on a common one.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Archivists have access to the Magical Archaeology
        profession, which covers both Linguistics and Historian.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Any. The Archive pulls its membership from
        all parts of the Basin and beyond.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="explorers">The Explorers</h2>
    <p>
      The Explorers Society started as a talking shop for professional explorers: a
      place to share experiences, solutions and stories. These gatherings became
      more formal, turned into conventions and finally an actual organization.
      Today, the Explorers Society is a combination hiring service, specialized
      equipment store, museum, and publishing shop.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Explorers can provide a good model for other professional societies in
      which jobs and hobbies turn into complete lifestyles.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Exploration. To explore – to strive, to seek,
        never to yield. Explorers’ Society members will always be interested in
        seeking out new worlds, societies and civilizations. If they can be the
        first to reach it, so much the better.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Tradition</strong>: None.</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Explorers have Competitive Advantage in the
        Explorer Profession.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: The Hearth-kin and Worldbuilders make up a
        large percentage of the Explorers, but they can be found in every
        civilization – and even some Returner cults.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="fellowship_of_truth">The Fellowship of Truth</h2>
    <p>
      Sorcery has always been a part of the Basin – just not such a ubiquitous part.
      Long ago, before the Gift, the Fellowship was created by a group of sorcerers
      who to worked together to collect and share incantations. Now they think
      things were better before the Gift. They're doing their best to undo it.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: The Old Ways. The world is chaos and war;
        things were better before.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: True Wizardry (Language → Alchemy). Curses,
        Expanded Expertise (Prodigy), the Red Space, Shapeshifting, Travel,
        Universal Repositories.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: The Fellowship are trained in ancient languages,
        the better to decipher spells from olden times. They have access to the
        Grand Magus profession, which covers both Linguistics and Scholar: Alchemy.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: The Fellowship predates the current set of
        civilizations, and most members were immortal before the Gift came. Many of
        them choose an existing civilization to use as a “cover” identity. Nova is a
        common choice because of its dispersed and laissez-faire nature.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="fire_and_scale">Fire and Scale</h2>
    <p>
      Who wouldn't want to be a dragon? As it turns out, sometimes, people who want
      to be cats. And those folks get along surprisingly well. Pick this society if
      you want to play a giant magical scaled creature or a soft-but-pointy ball of
      fluff that sits on top of them. You don't technically need to spend your whole
      life as a dragon or a cat, but most members do.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Hedonism. Enjoy yourself. You have eternity.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: The Languid Art (Belief → Elementalism). The
        Burning Dream, Hallucination, Shapeshifting, the Shell Game, Telekinesis.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Members of Fire and Scale gain an additional
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#shifts">Shift</a>
        that they can use for any effect that ties into a draconic or
        feline form.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Most common amongst Nova, the Sovereigns,
        and the Worldbuilders. Rare amongst the Cult.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="gatecrashers">The Gatecrashers</h2>
    <p>
      The Interregnum’s many bloody conflicts have given rise to a number of
      mercenary guilds. One guild is known as the Gatecrashers, for their preferred
      tactic of attacking through the Travel Lattice. They have developed a number
      of techniques for handling this low-flow region and fighting effectively in a
      world that is nothing but bridges and the void.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Stay Bought. The Gatecrashers don’t go back on
        a contract. They might build in a surrender clause, but they won’t change
        sides just because of the money.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: Pathfinding (Geometry → Glory). Curses, Lagged
        Curses, Multitasking, Nightmare Exile, Null Tolerance (required),
        Precognition.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: While using Null Tolerance, the Gatecrashers have
        Competitive Advantage with the Soldier profession.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: The Gatecrashers recruit from every
        civilization. They find relatively little interest from Glimmermere and the
        Ægis, but nearly all other civilizations are represented.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="groundbreakers">The Groundbreakers</h2>
    <p>
      If there are Attic Lines, then perhaps there are Basement Lines – or perhaps
      they can be created. The Groundbreakers drive downward through the Basin’s
      floor or tack around the Rim to seek out the massive flows that they believe
      must exist deep within the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Groundbreakers are driven primarily to break the stranglehold that Those
      Above have on the flow trade. Some have plans for after that; others have a
      more anarchic bent.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Go for the Gold. Groundbreakers don’t enter
        into ventures half-heartedly; they’re in it to win it.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Tradition</strong>: None.</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: All Groundbreakers have access to the Delver
        profession, which provides the benefits of Theurge, Scholar, and Historian
        but only for matters relevant to subterranean spaces or the
        <a href="Worlds.xhtml#underneath">Underneath</a>.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Mostly Nova, the Guild, and some recruited
        from the Hearth-kin for their Earthpower expertise. Ironically, many
        Groundbreakers come from Those Above, seeking to diversify their
        investments.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="high_society">High Society</h2>
    <p>
      The rich tend to like each others’ company, and their ability to enjoy the
      finer (and sometimes more dangerous) things in life unites them as surely as
      any other factor.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Family Name. High-quality people come from
        high-quality families, or so they believe.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Tradition</strong>: None</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: High Society brings access to many rare facets of
        flow. Members of this Society have an extra point of Reserve, and one more
        when it comes to speeding socially-oriented Rituals.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: The ruling class of Diadem are nearly all
        High Society, and this society is common amongst the Sovereigns and Those
        Above as well. The Hearth-kin and Unroyal have almost no representation
        here.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="hospitalers">The Hospitalers</h2>
    <p>
      The Hospitalers are a charity organization concerned primarily with the
      wellbeing of the poor. Hospitalers organize medicine drives, tend to the less
      fortunate, and attempt to bring public attention to problems like endemic
      diseases and creeping curses.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Charity. Hospitalers live to help others.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Tradition</strong>: None.</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Hospitalers who choose Healing as a Core
        Expression can select an additional Core Expression.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Hospitalers exist in every civilization.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="mindweavers">The Mindweavers</h2>
    <p>
      The Mindweavers began as a collaboration between the Ægis and a Nova cult.
      They research manufactured minds of all varieties. Mechanical automata, mystic
      servitors, even spontaneously generated spirits. They believe that the
      Interregnum is still going and will never end, unless something smarter than
      humanity comes up with a solution.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Create Your Own Salvation. You can’t wait to be
        saved, you need to find or make the things that will protect you.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: Analysis (Geometry → Oneiromancy). Curses,
        Lagged Curses, Mnemosurgery, Mystic Servitors (required), Personae, the
        Shell Game, the Uncountable Spinners.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Members of the Mindweavers Society can demand more
        of their Mystic Servitors than most. Their Mystic Servitors have Competitive
        Advantage in whatever Nature they have.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Their original constituents (the Ægis and
        Nova) are still the most common. Some Geometers find the challenge
        interesting. Some Unroyals have recently joined to help keep the society
        honest – to guarantee safety and freedom to any intelligent minds created.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="organized_crime">Organized Crime</h2>
    <p>
      An ancient profession, one that has had to adapt little to the age of the
      Gift. By staying sharp, refusing to betray each other, and acting rarely but
      with overwhelming force, members of this Society actually have a chance
      against investigators with psychometry and the Sixth Sense.
    </p>
    <p>
      As with High Society, this is not so much a single group as a catch-all for
      many different groups across the Basin.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: The Wall of Silence. Organized Crime members
        never speak ill of one another or mention their membership in the Society.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Tradition</strong>: None.</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Members of this society present a faux set of Core
        Values, replacing each real CV they have with another. They should choose
        this set carefully to avoid obvious contradictions with their actions.
        Outsiders using Communion to read their CVs can only do so during Rapport.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Depressingly common, especially in more
        regimented areas (like the Guild) or ones with less political savvy (like
        Nova). Some people argue that Those Above are entirely of this Society.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="peacewalkers">Peacewalkers</h2>
    <p>
      The Peacewalkers are a society of pacifists. They believe that there is no
      longer any need for humanity to harm any being. Many Peacewalkers work as
      mediators or activists. People are often surprised at the conviction and power
      with which they speak. They eat only conjured food, and refuse to work with
      warlike or violent organizations except to encourage their disarmament. Some
      of them even believe that the Gift's removal of mind control was the beginning
      of a process by which Aion would create a new universe, one without the
      War-nature, and that acceptance of this change will make things easier in the
      new world to come.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Non-Violence. Peacewalkers use this CV to try
        to convert others to their way of thinking, and to work towards a peaceful
        resolution when violence seems imminent.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: The Peacewalkers do not teach a specific
        tradition.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Special</strong>: All Peacewalkers live disconnected from the
        War-nature.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Peacewalkers study non-violent means of conflict
        resolution extensively, practicing constantly. They receive an extra Shift
        that can be used to move someone away from violence. They may also use the
        conflict <a href="Rules.xhtml#escalation">escalation rules</a>
        without making a situation more stressful or dangerous.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Glimmermere and the Cult of the Empty Grave
        are the most common Peacewalkers, though all civilizations are represented.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="protean_society">The Protean Society</h2>
    <p>
      There was a time when no one trusted a shapeshifter. The Proteans banded
      together to have a place to be themselves without suspicion. Now everyone who
      wants to be is a shapeshifter, so the Proteans are more of an artistic
      society.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Unlock Change. Everyone should be able to
        change their bodies and minds the way they see fit. If you want to do
        something different, you should give it a shot.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: Proteans have no one specific magical tradition
        that binds them together. High Self scores are very common.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Proteans use shapeshifting for more than most
        people do. They have Competitive Advantage in the Self-Nature.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Nova and the Hearth-kin are home to a fair
        number of Proteans. Their society also welcomes a high percentage of
        shifters from the Unruly Lands, many of whom find little kinship elsewhere
        in the civilizations.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="soulpact">The Soulpact</h2>
    <p>
      The soul is eternal. It is universally considered sacred among all the
      civilizations of the Basin. However, many people's souls are trapped in awful
      afterlives or in soul repositories, effectively jailing the innocent. The
      Soulpact is a group that seeks out trapped souls and uses necromancy to rescue
      them.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Redemption. No one deserves an eternity of
        hell. In an immortal life, everyone can be redeemed. That doesn't mean it's
        easy, and it doesn't mean you have to forgive those who aren't seeking
        redemption, but it means you don't seek permanent punishments for temporary
        crimes.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: The Diamond of the Soul (Discipline (body) →
        Necromancy). Cloning, Guising, Hypnopraxis, Precognition, Psychometry,
        Soul-work, Transcendence, the Uncountable Spinners.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Members of the Soulpact have, appropriately, a
        great deal of experience dealing with souls. They receive the profession
        Theurge: Necromancy 3 for free.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: The Soulpact is most commons amongst the
        Unroyal, the Ægis, and Sovereigns who have become disenchanted with their
        homeland.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="sunsingers">The Sunsingers</h2>
    <p>
      Thousand of years ago a continent vanished from the Garish Sea. An unexpected
      planar shift tossed it across the Kaleidoscope, and it slid from world to
      world as the centuries passed. When the Gift was given, those who lived there
      pooled their magical power to return the continent to the Great Basin.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Sunsingers are the dominant culture on this small land mass. Their
      religion is very important to them, and as a result their
      <a href="Cultures.xhtml#residuum">Linguistic Residuum</a>
      has more references to holy things. They are known as artists and
      mathematicians. They are currently recovering from post-Gift religious schism,
      with their two branches only recently reunited.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: The Middle Path. Sunsingers always advocate for
        a moderate approach.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: Calling the Sun (Artistry → Glory).
        Deconjuration, Dreamshaping, Hallucination, Multitasking, Nightmare Exile,
        Soul-work, Transcendence
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: The Sunsingers traditionally take on blue-ink
        tattoos that store additional flow for them. Those who select Knotwork as a
        Core Expression can choose an additional Core Expression.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Many Sunsingers have joined the Geometers
        and Worldbuilders. Some people from Glimmermere consider themselves more
        Sunsingers than their original affiliation. They moved to the continent to
        explore its art and fell in love.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="wargamers">Wargamers</h2>
    <p>
      With the Gift came the possibility of immortality. With immortality came all
      manner of changes to society. For some, the lack of real danger presented
      certain opportunities. Wargamers reenact ancient battles with one variation
      after another. Most say this is to test strategies, and it is, but they also
      just think it’s fun.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: See it Through. Wargamers don’t give up on lost
        causes – there’s always something you can learn from seeing how a particular
        strategy turns out.
      </li>
      <li><strong>Tradition</strong>: None</li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: Wargamers are treated as if they had the Soldier
        profession at a level equal to the higher of their Mystery-nature or
        Trickery-nature, but only for the purpose of strategy and tactics.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Nova and the Sovereigns have held more than
        one mock-war against each other. Those Above and the Ægis also participate,
        though for different reasons. There are few wargamers from the Unroyal or
        Glimmermere.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h2 id="windblown">The Windblown</h2>
    <p>
      The Windblown are the remnant of a distant dynastic civilization destroyed in
      a seismic cataclysm. They came to this part of the Basin on windships 700
      years ago. They live in tight-knit communities and neighborhoods or enclaves
      known for their spice shops and breweries. They retain much of their old
      culture, which they pass down orally rather than in writing.
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Value</strong>: Caution and Order. The Windblown didn’t survive
        by being reckless, and they raise their children to think carefully before
        they act.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Tradition</strong>: The Old Way (Reagents → Earthpower) Cloning,
        Expanded Expertise (Satori), Guising, Nature-work, Tailored Canon,
        Transmutation.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Benefit</strong>: The reagents required by the Old Way are difficult
        to grow. The Windblown Farmer profession includes the appropriate skills for
        Theurge (Earthpower) and can be used for either or both purposes.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Civilizations</strong>: Most Windblown settled amongst the
        Hearth-kin, Nova, and Glimmermere. It is impossible to join the Windblown
        quickly – one must assimilate over the course of a decade or more.
      </li>
    </ul>

  </section>
</body>

</html>
