<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>End Notes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Final Words" epub:type="conclusion">
    <h1 id="final_words" class="title">Final Words</h1>

    <h2 id="ack">Acknowledgments</h2>
    <p>
      Thank you to those who gave feedback on the alpha and beta editions of
      Sorc.
    </p>
    <p>
      There are several regular contributors on the Wikidot forums whose work
      has influenced this game, including 1of3, Rhebeqah, and others. All of
      them improved the game as it was developed. Everyone in the SA2
      acknowledgments also deserves another high-five here, because this game
      built on that one and neither would be as good without their work.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thank you to Sarah Lancaster for her support, understanding, and
      insights.
    </p>
    <p>Thank you to my parents for buying me all those RPGs so long ago.</p>
  </section>

  <section class="chapter afterword" title="Afterword" epub_type="afterword">
    <h2 id="after">Afterword</h2>

    <p>
      As Sufficiently Advanced quotes Arthur C. Clarke, we end this book with
      a quote from Ursula K. LeGuin:
    </p>
    <p>
      <i>“I talk about the gods, I am an atheist. But I am an artist too, and
        therefore a liar. Distrust everything I say. I am telling the
        truth.”</i>
    </p>
  </section>

  <section class="chapter" title="Glossary" epub:type="glossary">
    <h1 id="glossary">Glossary</h1>
    <dl class="glossary">
      <dt><a href="Rules.xhtml#complications">Advantage</a></dt>
      <dd>A positive effect from a Conflict, Twist, or other rule effect.</dd>

      <dt><a href="Introduction.xhtml#the_archive">Archive, the</a></dt>
      <dd>
        An association of librarians, anthropologists, and archaeologists
        driven to collect and distribute magical knowledge. In this game’s
        default setup, the PCs are members of the Archive.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#flow">Aspect</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The ways that magic and the world itself can be described. If Flow
        (see below) is a verb, aspects are its adverbs.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Cultures.xhtml#attic_lines">Attic Lines</a></dt>
      <dd>
        Ley Lines that were driven upward long ago and which cascade through
        the empty space above the sky. Here the world is less changing and
        there is nothing to disrupt their flow. They are the most reliable way
        to transport highly aspected long distances.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#canon_form">Canon of Form</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The catalog of objects, plants, animals, and archetypes that provides
        the shapes for conjured things. Individuals have their own Signature
        Canon formed by experience and upbringing, while regions have a
        Consensus Canon formed by the city-wide communal subconscious.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#communion-nature">Communion-nature</a></dt>
      <dd>The part of human nature that seeks to connect with others.</dd>

      <dt><a href="Rules.xhtml#complications">Complication</a></dt>
      <dd>A negative result from a Conflict, Twist, or other rule effect.</dd>

      <dt><a href="Worlds.xhtml#dream_realms">Dream Realms</a></dt>
      <dd>
        Worlds where concepts and ideals, as well as actual dreams, form the
        basis of reality. Whereas the Worlds Beyond are persistent, the Dream
        Realms exist only while there are minds to create them. The Dream
        Realms are invisible but ever-present – they exist between all living
        beings. Entering them is the domain of the Communion Nature.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Rules.xhtml#complications">Effect</a></dt>
      <dd>A Complication or Advantage.</dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#flow">Flow or The Flow</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The power you tap into to create magical effects, which wells up into
        the Great Basin in all places, through all things.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#founts">Fount</a></dt>
      <dd>
        One of the sources of magical power, each with its own unique
        character and approaches. The Founts described in this book are
        Alchemy, Arete, Earthpower, Elementalism, Glory, Necromancy, and
        Oneiromancy.
      </dd>

      <dt>Gift, the</dt>
      <dd>
        Broadly, the ability to do magic. More specifically, the moment about
        400 years ago when everyone in the Kaleidoscope was simultaneously
        granted that ability.
      </dd>

      <dt>GM Character</dt>
      <dd>
        A character controlled by the Game Master rather than by the players.
        Also referred to as an NPC (non-player character).
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Worlds.xhtml#great_basin">Great Basin</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The world in which most of Sorcerously Advanced takes place. Part of
        the Kaleidoscope (see below).
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#import">Import</a></dt>
      <dd>
        A measure of a character’s importance to the plot. The higher your
        Power score, the lower your Import will be.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#industry-nature">Industry-nature</a></dt>
      <dd>The part of human nature that seeks to build and create.</dd>

      <dt>Interregnum</dt>
      <dd>
        The period of war and chaos that followed the Gift. The Interregnum
        was named to imply that, for the civilizations that have passed
        through it, a more enlightened and peaceful age has arrived. In the
        estimation of most historians, the Interregnum has not ended.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Worlds.xhtml#kaleidoscope">Kaleidoscope, the</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The myriad of worlds, each of which is a coequal counterpart of the
        Great Basin. These can be reached via Travel (q.v.).
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#ley_lines">Ley Lines</a></dt>
      <dd>
        Rivers of flow that move through the Basin. Ley lines can be tapped,
        redirected, or fractured into many smaller streams, all of which takes
        a fair amount of effort and know-how.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#mystery-nature">Mystery-nature</a></dt>
      <dd>The part of human nature that seeks to understand the world.</dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#natures">Nature</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The six components of one's identity that shape how magic is created.
        The natures are
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#communion-nature">Communion</a>,
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#industry-nature">Industry</a>,
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#mystery-nature">Mystery</a>,
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#self-nature">Self</a>,
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#trickery-nature">Trickery</a>, and
        <a href="CharGen.xhtml#war-nature">War</a>. Natures have both a
        numerical score (used for character-level actions) and an Approach
        descriptor (used for player-level actions).
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#null_zones">Null Zone</a></dt>
      <dd>
        A place where very little flow enters the Basin, and magical tasks are
        difficult or impossible to accomplish.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#paths">Path</a></dt>
      <dd>
        One of the many means by which magical effects can be created.
        Examples include receiving power funneled from a supernatural patron,
        combining and applying reagents, or chanting words of power.
      </dd>

      <dt>Player Character</dt>
      <dd>
        A character controlled by a player, rather than one controlled by the
        GM. Also sometimes called a “main character”. Player characters have
        access to Twists; GM characters do not.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#import">Power</a></dt>
      <dd>
        A combined rating of a character’s magical prowess, determined by a
        combination of Nature scores and Expertise. The trade-off between
        Power and Import is the central balance of the game.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#The_Red_Space">Red Space, the</a></dt>
      <dd>
        A vast space parallel to all points in the Kaleidoscope, used for
        storage.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#import">Reserve</a></dt>
      <dd>
        Points that can be spent to bring more of your your character’s
        abilities to bear on a project. Each character has a maximum number of
        Reserve points equal to their Power score.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#self-nature">Self-nature</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The part of human nature that seeks to understand and change itself.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Rules.xhtml#soul_repository">Soul Repository</a></dt>
      <dd>
        A place or device that attracts the souls of those who die in the
        local area, retaining them in the Great Basin rather than allowing
        them to continue on to an afterlife in the Worlds Beyond.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Magic.xhtml#Travel">Travel</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The opening of doors into a bridge-filled space that connects all
        physical worlds. Travel is the fastest and most reliable means of
        crossing large distances.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#trickery-nature">Trickery-nature</a></dt>
      <dd>The part of human nature that seeks to deceive others.</dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#natures">Twist</a></dt>
      <dd>
        An out-of-game currency spent through one of your character’s Nature
        to generate Effects, affecting the plot in specific ways. You start
        each session with a number of Twists equal to your Import, and they
        are generally gained as bad things happen to your character.
      </dd>

      <dt>
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#uncountable_spinners">Uncountable Spinners, the</a>
      </dt>
      <dd>
        A broken system that tethers souls to the Basin with invisible silver
        cords.
      </dd>

      <dt>
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#Universal_Repositories">Universal Repository</a>
      </dt>
      <dd>
        One of several omnipresent knowledge stores. Each Fount has its own,
        and its own way of storing knowledge within it.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Cultures.xhtml#unruly_lands">Unruly Lands</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The pejorative used by the civilizations detailed in this book to
        refer to other civilizations.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="CharGen.xhtml#war-nature">War-nature</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The part of human nature that seeks to dominate and destroy others.
      </dd>

      <dt><a href="Worlds.xhtml#worlds_beyond">Worlds Beyond</a></dt>
      <dd>
        The supernatural realms beyond the Basin. Each has a series of realms
        that are commanded by various rulers, often called “pantheons”. The
        Worlds Beyond sometimes touch the Basin, and sometimes must be reached
        via Travel. Examples include the Hell of the Sovereigns of Hell, and
        the Elemental Realms tapped by the Elementalism fount.
      </dd>
    </dl>
  </section>

  <section class="chapter" title="Licensing" epub:type="">
    <h1 id="licensing">Licensing</h1>
    <h2>Text</h2>
    <p>
      The text and trade dress of this work are licensed under the Creative
      Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License. To view a
      copy of this license, visit
      http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ or send a letter to
      Creative Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042, USA.
    </p>
    <h2>Images</h2>
    <p>
      The epub version of this book has fewer images than the PDF version.
    </p>
    <p>
      All full-color images in this work, including elements used in the cover
      design, were created by Tithi Luadthong (aka GrandFailure). These works
      were purchased from CanStockPhoto. Some images have been digitally
      altered. The only exception is the “star lotus” under the
      <a href="TitlePages.xhtml">Singularity text</a>, which is constructed
      out of public domain components and is hereby also placed in the public
      domain. Icons found in this work are from Game-Icons.net, licensed under
      the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of
      this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ or send
      a letter to Creative Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042, USA.
    </p>

    <p>
      Diagrams were created by Colin Fredericks and are released into the
      public domain.
    </p>

    <ul>
      <li>Telepathy (Communion) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Concrete bag (Industry) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Eye shield (Mystery) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Anatomy (Self) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Box trap (Trickery) by Skoll</li>
      <li>War axe (War) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Paint Brush (Artistry) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Prayer (Belief) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Stigmata (Blood Magic) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Body balance (Discipline) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Heptagram (Geometry) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Wax tablet (Language) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Receive money (Patrons) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Hot spices (Reagents) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Radial balance (W. Magic) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Bubbling bowl (Alchemy) by Lorc</li>
      <li>High kick (Arete) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Fragrance (Earthpower) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Frostfire (Elementalism) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Interstellar path (Glory) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Reaper scythe (Necromancy) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Gold shell (Oneiromancy) by Delapouite</li>
      <li>Broken tablet (Universal) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Tied scroll (Common) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Bookmarklet (Restricted) by Lorc</li>
      <li>Processor (G. Wonderwork) by Lorc</li>
    </ul>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
