<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Introduction" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="introduction" class="title">Introduction</h1>

    <p>
      Sorcerously Advanced is a "hard fantasy" game of cutting-edge magic. It
      focuses on questions of power, justice, safety, and potential in the
      aftermath of a metaphysical singularity.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this setting, magic is so ubiquitous, so powerful, and so
      well-developed that it has become the basis for the world's
      civilizations. Sorcerously Advanced is a speculative fiction game that
      doesn't revolve around rare, powerful mages and mighty warriors, but
      instead around the destiny of a world where everyone has magical power.
    </p>
    <p>
      Player characters in Sorcerously Advanced are envoys and archaeologists
      for the Archive, an organization that seeks out historical records and
      magical inscriptions from ages long past. Because many of their sites
      are in war zones, strange and distant worlds, and other dangerous
      surroundings, Archivists often recruit locals to help them complete
      their tasks. The Archive serves as an institution of learning for many
      civilizations, not all of whom are completely comfortable with their
      work.
    </p>
    <p>
      This game is about the effects of life-changing powers on society and on
      individuals. It’s about beliefs and decisions and the impacts they have.
      It’s about the endless nature of knowledge. Most of all, it’s about what
      it means to become what you desire.
    </p>

    <h2 id="play_in_brief">Game Play in Brief</h2>

    <p>
      Sorcerously Advanced has a traditional Game-Master-and-Players setup,
      like most roleplaying games. One person (the Game Master or GM)
      describes the world and speaks for the important secondary characters.
      The other people in the group (the players) portray their own individual
      main characters and describe their actions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Game sessions often involve the GM setting events in motion and the
      players describing their responses. Players also have a great deal of
      agency in deciding what their characters will do, from immediate
      responses to long-term plans.
    </p>
    <p>
      Most events in the game are handled through Natures (basic attributes
      enhanced by magic), Core Values (your character’s beliefs), and
      Professions (your character’s expertise in various fields). You also
      have Reserve that you can use to speed the completion of long-term
      projects.
    </p>
    <p>
      If your goals conflict with those of another character (typically a GM
      character, but sometimes a player character) the game uses a score
      comparison to see who prevails. No dice are involved. You add together a
      Profession and a Core Value, then multiply by your Nature to get a
      total. Comparing this total against your opponent’s score will let you
      know who wins a conflict. The margin of victory tells you whether the
      victory is complete or partial. In most conflicts both the winner and
      loser will take a Complication or gain an Advantage to represent
      injuries, changed mindsets, economic hardships, exhaustion, and other
      results of a conflict.
    </p>
    <p>
      Players can also control the game through Approaches, which describe the
      type of stories that unfold around their characters. Approaches are a
      purely metagame attribute. The characters themselves are not aware of
      them. Approaches are activated by spending Twists. You get some Twists
      at the start of each game, and can gain more by willingly accepting
      Complications for your character. Characters with high Nature scores
      will find it hard to gain more Twists. You can also use your Twists to
      create Plots, which are long-term changes to the game world that you
      build up over the course of several sessions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Your characters do magic by tapping and shaping flow, a ubiquitous
      source of mystical power. Flow has various aspects that describe it,
      both physical and emotional, which change how it can be used.
    </p>

    <h2 id="feel">The Feel of Sorcerously Advanced</h2>

    <p>
      Most fantasy stories revolve around characters who are special in some
      way: more powerful, more talented, or simply unique in the world. In
      Sorcerously Advanced, everyone has that kind of power and potential.
      Magic in this world is not reserved for the elite. While not everyone
      wants to destroy mountains or become lightning, most people in this
      world are capable of shapeshifting, hurling bolts of power, and walking
      through walls. Nearly everyone is immortal. The repercussions of this
      change have already shaped civilizations, and the full consequences are
      yet to be determined.
    </p>
    <p>
      This is a game of constant wonder, shifting assumptions, and exceptions
      to rules. The world is fantastical, and its people are more so. Magic is
      the basis of the world’s civilizations, and yet its rules are
      unreliable. Players in this game should be prepared to have the face of
      the world change as the game plays out, with unavoidable repercussions
      for their characters.
    </p>
    <p>
      This is also a game that encourages complex narratives, with twisting
      multi-layered plots and hidden motives. With powerful characters and
      fast conflict resolution, the game often moves quickly, and a lot can
      happen in one session. Morality is important, and characters often
      disagree, leading to ethical debates that are at the core of the
      game.
    </p>

    <h2 id="where_start">Where to Start?</h2>

    <p>
      You should definitely read the Setting Overview below. Then, you can
      either keep reading with the Character Creationsection, or
      use one of these links to jump ahead:
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li><a href="Rules.xhtml">Game Play</a></li>
      <li><a href="Magic.xhtml">Magic</a></li>
      <li><a href="Magic.xhtml#spell_list">List of magic arts</a></li>
      <li>
        <a href="Cultures.xhtml">Civilizations</a>
        and <a href="Cultures.xhtml#societies">Societies</a>
      </li>
    </ul>

    <h3>Returning Player Notes</h3>

    <p> If you’ve played Sufficiently Advanced
      (the predecessor to this game), you may want to check out the
      <a href="Advice.xhtml#changes_from_sa">comparison between the two games</a>. The rules are nearly
      unchanged from SA2, but the changes in the underlying metaphysics of the
      world make a big difference.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we need to differentiate between this game and that one, we’ll call
      the second edition of Sufficiently Advanced SA2 (SA1 for the first
      edition), and we’ll call this one Sorc as a shortening of Sorcerously
      Advanced.
    </p>

    <h2 id="overview">Setting Overview</h2>

    <h3>The World and the Gift</h3>

    <p>
      The world is a bowl, the “Great Basin”, two million miles across. If you
      fly up high enough, where the atmosphere begins to thin and you can see
      forever, you will see a titanically large androgynous golden human with
      a single vacant eye-socket, a hole in its chest, and twenty-four arms,
      twenty-two of which are in constant motion and two of which gently hold
      the entire world.
    </p>
    <p>The Basin is roughly 4.32 billion years old.</p>
    <p>
      Four hundred years ago, a single, sudden, unexpected event called the
      Gift changed the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Before the Gift, only certain people from certain bloodlines could do
      magic. When the Gift was given, that changed. Suddenly, everyone was
      capable of magic. Most adults became quickly capable of magic that
      rivaled the most powerful wizards at the time. Intensive research has
      since surpassed that level.
    </p>
    <p>
      In addition, the Gift made free-willed individuals impossible to
      dominate via mind control, possession, or the like, though they can
      still be influenced in various ways. This part of the Gift was given to
      all creatures, even the dead and the denizens of the Worlds Beyond. As a
      consequence, all sorcerous bindings were broken, including those
      controlling demons and spirits.
    </p>
    <p>
      This game focuses on a part of the Great Basin where several powerful
      civilizations have risen to prominence, and a number of less wealthy and
      stable nations (the so-called Unruly Lands) struggle to maintain
      themselves. In the center of this region is a group called The Archive.
      Their operations form the backbone of the game. Your characters come
      from one of these civilizations or a nearby land, and work for the
      Archive.
    </p>

    <h3 id="the_archive">The Archive</h3>

    <p>
      The Archive is the Basin's oldest continually-operational library. The
      Archivist’s Society, a group of librarians, archivists, philosophers,
      strategists, and researchers, direct and benefit from the Archive's
      operations. There are about two thousand Archivists in all.
    </p>
    <p>The core mission of the Archivists is:</p>
    <ol>
      <li>
        To obtain knowledge from the ancient world, especially magical
        knowledge.
      </li>
      <li>
        To translate that knowledge so that modern audiences can understand
        it.
      </li>
      <li>
        To place that knowledge within each and every Universal Repository, so
        that it can be shared with every sentient being.
      </li>
    </ol>
    <p>
      The Archive has a policy of neutrality in conflicts between
      civilizations and between societies. Because of that they are typically
      allowed travel to every civilization. Many people look at Archivists
      with suspicion, as they have a reputation as tomb-robbers, but no one
      suggests that the Archive's work has not benefited every civilization in
      the Great Basin and beyond. Only the Fellowship of Truth, who want to
      undo the Gift, have regularly opposed the Archive and its work. The
      Archive considers the Fellowship its nemesis.
    </p>
    <p>
      As Archivists, your characters will officially seek out knowledge,
      return it to the Archive, and disseminate it to the masses.
      Unofficially, you may also wind up negotiating digging rights, buying
      and selling information, helping to write a peace treaty, fighting off
      bandits, teaching people about magic, escaping from Returner cults,
      becoming embroiled in local politics, and discovering unexpected truths
      about the world and its creator.
    </p>
    <p>It's a busy job.</p>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
