<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>Game Play</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Game Play" epub:type="part">
    <h1 id="rules" class="title">Game Play</h1>

    <p>
      This chapter gives you the rules for playing a game of Sorcerously
      Advanced. These rules are the way in which you and your character
      interact with the universe of the game.
    </p>

    <p>
      There are two ways to get things done in this game. The first way is
      through the use of character-level abilities, such as Core Values,
      Nature scores, and Expertise. The first part of this chapter deals with
      character-level actions. The second way is through the use of
      player-level abilities, such as Approaches and Plots. Player-level
      abilities are available only to the players’ characters, and not to GM
      characters. The <a href="#approaches_twists">second part</a> of this chapter
      deals with player-level actions.
    </p>

    <p>
      Both character-level and player-level actions are tied into
      Complications and Advantages, which represent story events in game
      terms. Your character’s statistics are the cause; Complications and
      Advantages are the effects. Because they are so important and so central
      to the game, we’ll start by discussing them and then move on to other
      game mechanics that tie into them.
    </p>
  </section>

  <section title="Difficult Play and Safety Tools" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="safety_tools">Difficult Play and Safety Tools</h2>

    <p>This game revolves around themes of...</p>

    <ul>
      <li>The use and abuse of power</li>
      <li>Political, cultural, and academic colonialism</li>
      <li>
        What we become when we are limited by our desires and beliefs rather than
        our minds or bodies
      </li>
    </ul>

    <p>
      Any or all of these may result in emotionally difficult play, particularly
      where they overlap with players’ real-world experiences, and especially for
      those who have had bad experiences with abuses of power in their lives. To
      improve the play experience for everyone, there are three rules that apply
      while you are playing Sorcerously Advanced:
    </p>

    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>The Biology Rule:</strong> Anyone can leave the play space at any time, for any
        reason, or for no reason at all, with or without explanation, with no
        penalty. The GM or players can inquire if they’re concerned – “You ok?”
        “Did something happen?” – but no response or clarification are required.
      </li>

      <li>
        <strong>The Good Friends Rule:</strong> GMs and players gladly accept the task of adjusting
        their stories to avoid causing pain or disgust. All participants are
        mandated to respond to indications of concern or revulsion, such as:
        "Ughhh", "Um...", "Ew", "Oh lord", "Hold on",
        "Where is this going?", "Can we not?". Any
        channel is acceptable: verbal, note passing, text messages, facial
        expressions, a raised hand, etc. The response should be immediate, and
        might include: a time-out to discuss with the group, a private conference,
        or simply asking what to do. Good phrases to remember include “Are we ok?”
        “Should I wind that back?” “Should we skip this?”
      </li>

      <li>
        <strong>The Self-Determination Rule:</strong> Let others determine their own levels of
        comfort. If you read pain or disgust in someone’s manner, bring it up –
        but if they tell you they’re ok, let the matter rest. Everyone has their
        own reasons for playing RPGs.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <p>
      These are fairly unstructured rules, are intended to work within the social
      norms found in many gaming groups. Our hope is that more “natural”
      interactions will make it easier for people to bring up when they’re
      uncomfortable before that turns into pain. If you’d like a set of tools with
      a bit more structure to them, we recommend starting with the
      <a href=" https://bit.ly/ttrpgsafetytoolkit">Tabletop RPG Safety Toolkit</a>,
      a free resource.
    </p>
  </section>

  <section title="Complications and Advantages" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="complications">Complications and Advantages</h2>

    <p>
      Sorcerously Advanced revolves around Complications and Advantages,
      collectively known as Effects. In order to understand the rest of the
      game system, you need to understand Effects.
    </p>

    <p>
      Complications are bad things that happen to your character, or
      unfortunate circumstances that surround them. Being injured, losing
      money or prestige, and being kidnapped by your opponents are all
      Complications.
    </p>

    <p>
      Advantages are the reverse: favorable circumstances and good things that
      happen to your character. Financial windfalls, election victories, and
      discovering your opponent’s plans are all potential Advantages.
      Advantages help to model consequences that aren’t easily described as
      Complications for your opponent.
    </p>

    <p>
      These effects are the core of the rules system. When you’re in a
      conflict, both characters will end up taking a Complication or gaining
      an Advantage. If you spend Twists, you will typically create an
      Advantage for yourself or a Complication for someone else. When you need
      more Twists, you gain them by taking a Complication. Almost everything
      in the game ties into the Effect system.
    </p>

    <p>
      Advantages and Complications are broken up into five levels, as shown
      below. The number shown is the <a href="#activating_approaches">Twist cost</a>
      for that level. There are no even-leveled Effects – you can’t choose
      something between Moderate and Major, for example.
    </p>

    <ul>
      <li>Trivial (1): Immediate and ignorable, no new info.</li>
      <li>Minor (3): Short term, low impact, skeletal info.</li>
      <li>Moderate (5): Long term, high impact, or accurate info.</li>
      <li>Major (7): Long term, high impact, and accurate info.</li>
      <li>Critical (9): <a href="#rule_of_force">Rule of Force</a>.</li>
    </ul>

    <p>
      Details for each level are below. Examples of these effects in play can
      be found in the sections on <a href="#conflict">Conflict</a> and
      <a href="#approaches_twists">Approach use</a>.
      The Advice section has tips for GMs on
      <a href="Advice.xhtml#adjudicating_effects">how to handle Complications</a>.
    </p>

    <h4>Trivial (1)</h4>

    <p>
      Immediate and minor impact to unnamed characters. No important
      information is involved. Such Complications are used to provide flavor
      and verisimilitude rather than game effects. Examples: Your foe is
      annoyed or distracted. Your opponent is barely taxed. Observers lose
      track of a single being among dozens during a riot. Prevent yourself
      from stumbling at an unimportant time. Give your foe a moment of doubt.
    </p>

    <p>
      Players may only willingly accept one Trivial Complication per game
      session.
    </p>

    <h4>Minor (3)</h4>

    <p>
      Minor effects are short-term, low-impact, and involve skeletal
      information. They can still be potent if several build up, but they are
      unlikely to be a problem in the short term. Examples: An escape, but not
      without consequence. A delay or acceleration in plans. Your location is
      revealed to a distant enemy or vice versa. You are pointed toward the
      next piece of the puzzle. Minor but noticeable monetary impact. Minor
      injury.
    </p>

    <h4>Moderate (5)</h4>

    <p>
      Moderate effects are long-term, or high-impact, or involve accurate
      information, but not more than one. Examples: Kidnappings. Your actions
      are revealed to a distant enemy or vice versa. Unable to access a Nature
      or Profession. Core Values reduced or increased. You are befriended by
      the enemy. Plans significantly delayed or accelerated. Material
      possessions destroyed. Substantial injury. Resources severely taxed or
      substantially increased. A clean escape.
    </p>

    <h4>Major (7)</h4>

    <p>
      Major effects are long-term and high-impact and can involve accurate
      information. Examples: Deluded by the enemy, or able to successfully
      feed them misinformation. Unable to access several Natures or
      Professions. One Core Value or Core Expression changed. Convinced of a
      particular fact or falsehood. Important secrets revealed to the enemy.
      Allies turn against you. Friends lost. Your Society rejects you. Severe
      injury. Unconsciousness. Resources lost forever.
    </p>

    <h4>Critical (9)</h4>

    <p>
      Effects at this level may bring the <a href="#rule_of_force">Rule of Force</a>
      into play. Examples: Death and fates worse than death. All Core Values
      changed. A major character is dying or near death. Your target is unable
      to exercise any number of Natures or Professions. You are exiled from
      your beloved homeland. Extensive brainwashing. Friends’ allegiances
      reversed. Long-term plans ruined, or coming to fruition immediately.
    </p>

    <p>
      Players may only willingly accept one Critical Complication per game
      session.
    </p>

    <aside title="The Big Deal Rule">
      <h3 id="big_deal_rule">The Big Deal Rule</h3>
      <p>
        A Complication that does not cause problems for its character is
        not a Complication. Twists are not gained from Complications whose
        effects can be easily ignored.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <h3>Recovery</h3>

    <p>
      It is possible to recover from any Complication, short of certain items
      at the Critical level. Complications created through conflict can be
      removed by the use of Approaches or magical healing, but those willingly
      accepted in order to gain Twists cannot (see the
      <a href="#frying_pan_rule">Frying Pan Rule</a>).
    </p>

    <p>
      The general length of time that Complications last is “until you get
      them fixed,” which can vary greatly depending on the situation the
      characters find themselves in. Seeing a psychologist, visiting a
      hospital, spending time to reconnect with a friend, all of these can be
      useful actions to take if you need to recuperate. See also the
      <a href="Magic.xhtml#Healing">Healing art</a>.
    </p>

    <p>
      For some Complications (such as “befriended by the enemy”), the
      character may not be capable of fixing their own issues, and may need
      help from others. Complications left unaddressed may persist
      indefinitely, but it is recommended that only Major Complications have
      impact beyond a single game session, and only Critical ones should have
      permanent effects.
    </p>

    <aside title="Large-Scale Complications">
      <h3>Large-Scale Complications</h3>

      <p>
        Large and well-protected groups with the <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> descriptor can
        also suffer from Complications. However, because of their size, a
        slightly different set of Complications is used.
        In general, affecting Infrastructure-sized groups is easier with
        Plots or Projects.
      </p>
    </aside>

  </section>

  <section title="Basic Actions" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="basic">Basic Actions</h2>

    <p>
      Characters taking unopposed actions will find success or failure based
      primarily on four factors: their Core Values, their Expertise, their
      Nature scores, and their players’ ingenuity. For each factor, determine
      a “yes” or “no” answer based on the following guidelines.
    </p>

    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Core Values:</strong> Does the character care about the
        outcome of the event? Are they willing to put in the time and effort
        required?
      </li>

      <li>
        <strong>Expertise:</strong> Does the character have a Profession that
        covers these sorts of tasks? Do they have substantial experience in
        this area, as represented by a properly-ranked Profession?
      </li>

      <li>
        <strong>Nature:</strong> Are the character’s Nature scores up for the
        job? Are they enhanced in such a way as to make the task reasonable?
        Does the character have tools or know arts that would help in this
        area?
      </li>

      <li>
        <strong>Ingenuity:</strong> Is the task one that is simple, easy, or
        obvious given the character’s attributes? If not, can the player
        invent a way in which to use those attributes and solve the problem?
        Can the player redefine the problem to be a solvable one, or find a
        way around the issue?
      </li>
    </ul>

    <p>
      This approach to solving a problem is known as answering the Four
      Questions, or using a Basic Action. Conflicts between characters
      (whether PCs or NPCs) should not be handled using these rules; see the
      sidebars about
      “<a href="#contest_vs_conflict">Conflict vs. Contest</a>” and
      “<a href="#serious_threats">Serious Threats are Sentient</a>”.
    </p>

    <p>
      If you find the answers to be “yes” in three out of four categories, you
      should consider the task accomplished. The higher the character’s
      attributes, the faster the task can be done. If all four categories are
      on the character’s side, the task will be completed in style, quickly,
      and with a minimum of fuss.
    </p>

    <p>
      If two or more of the answers are “no,” however, the character is doomed
      to failure. Without enhanced Natures, the character may know how to
      achieve something without actually being able to accomplish it – the
      classic “If only I had a...” Lack of Expertise can lead to botched
      efforts and imperfect work that falls apart quickly. Lack of an
      appropriate CV leads to a an uninspired effort, short on passion or
      dedication. A lack of ingenuity on the player’s part cements these, and
      ingenuity on its own can only accomplish so much.
    </p>

    <h3>Restrictions</h3>

    <p>
      When considering particularly complex or skill-oriented tasks, Expertise
      is the most important factor. Certain tasks simply cannot be attempted,
      let alone completed, without the appropriate skills in place. Someone
      who has never picked a lock before is doomed to stand aimlessly before
      it, stymied by a lack of knowledge. The shark-filled waters of
      nation-state politics are likewise impossible to navigate without some
      experience. The GM should be fairly strict on this front. The level of
      Profession required should rarely be more than 2, but one must have the
      right skill for the job.
    </p>

    <p>
      Conversely, the applicability of Core Values should be fairly wide when
      it comes to basic actions. A character who has the skills and technology
      necessary to complete an action can succeed if they care about something
      broadly related to the goal. The Self-Preservation CV will be relevant
      to many critical goals.
    </p>

    <section title="Positive Modifiers">
      <h3>Positive Modifiers</h3>
      <p>There are three ways to improve your odds of success in a Basic Action:</p>

      <h4 id="comp_adv">Competitive Advantage</h4>
      <p>
        Some characters have a “Competitive Advantage” in a particular Nature or
        Profession. Competitive advantage can take the answer to one of the Four
        Questions from a “no” to a “maybe”, or from “maybe” to “yes”. This can be
        especially useful when the character needs a Nature that he or she does not
        have. It enables the character to rely on unusual tricks and cutting-edge
        techniques from a different Nature to achieve unexpected and amazing
        results.
      </p>
      <p>
        Competitive advantage has other benefits as well: It gives +1 before
        multiplication in Conflicts, and see also
        “<a href="#lateral_strategies">Lateral Strategies</a>”.
      </p>

      <h4 id="push_hard">Pushing Hard</h4>
      <p>
        When you are on the border between success and failure, having a little
        extra effort to put in can make the difference. You may spend one (and only
        one) point of Reserve to take the answer to one of the Four Questions from a
        “no” to a “maybe”, or from “maybe” to “yes”.
      </p>

      <h4 id="assist_basic">Assistance from Others</h4>
      <p>
        “Two heads are better than one” is a common saying for a reason. Team
        efforts, whether from just one assistant or a large group, can take the
        answer to one of the Four Questions from a “no” to a “maybe”, or from
        “maybe” to “yes”.</p>
      <p>
        Assistance is most often helpful in applications of raw
        Nature, such as strength or peer pressure. Some Professions benefit from
        multiple people working in parallel; others suffer from a “too many cooks”
        effect. The GM should make their best call here. Teamwork’s most reliable
        impact is that it simply speeds things up. Ten people may not quite work ten
        times as fast as one person, but they can come close. See the
        <a href="Rules.xhtml#rituals">Ritual</a> rules for more detail.
      </p>
      <p>
        <a href="#teamwork_conflict">Teamwork in conflicts</a> works differently.
      </p>
    </section>

    <section title="Mishaps">
      <h3>Mishaps</h3>
      <p>
        Because failure can create interesting situations, and even the most
        powerful can fail sometimes, there are two ways your character might fail at
        a Basic Action even if it seems they should succeed.
      </p>
      <p>
        These rules are referenced in many other places in this book, for good
        reason: they're the best ways to pick up Twists during game play.
      </p>

      <h4 id="bad_luck">The Bad Luck Rule</h4>
      <p>
        The GM may offer you some Twists to turn one of your answers to one of the
        Four Questions from a “yes” to a “no”. This is intended to be used to model
        those times when you <strong>should</strong> be able to handle the
        situation, but dumb luck intervenes, regardless of your magical might. You
        call your patron by the wrong name. You can’t find your keys. You tap a flow
        with the wrong aspect. Life gives you lemons, but you get some Twists.
      </p>
      <p>
        The number of Twists you receive is dependent on the level of Complication
        that is being offered. The total is
        <strong>reduced by your Power score</strong>, but you can still get one
        Twist even if your Power score is higher than the Complication level.
      </p>
      <p>
        You are not required to accept the offered Twists. You may reject them and
        succeed despite the bad luck. If you do accept the Twists, treat this as a
        voluntary Complication – the
        <a href="#frying_pan_rule">Frying Pan Rule</a> applies.
      </p>
      <p>
        Players can also trigger the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>
        at any time just to get Twists. See the
        <a href="#approaches">Approaches section</a>
        for more on selecting Complications for your character.
      </p>

      <h4 id="worst_enemy">The Worst Enemy Rule</h4>
      <p>
        The <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a> (above) is for times when you fail despite your
        enhancements. Sometimes, though, your power is exactly the problem. You’ve
        created too much aspected flow to handle. You called up something you cannot
        put down. Your mind is stuck in the mindset for war-magic and you need to
        escape. You are your own worst enemy.
      </p>
      <p>
        In such circumstances you won’t be able to get out of the problem using your
        Tradition and Professions alone. Therefore, you receive the full Twist
        amount, <strong>without any reduction for your Power.</strong>
      </p>
      <p>
        Just like with the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>,
        players can trigger this to cause problems
        for their character and gain Twists. However, only one Complication from the
        Worst Enemy Rule can be active at once. Your character can have as many Bad
        Luck Rule Complications active at once as you desire.
      </p>
    </section>

    <aside title="Do I need a Core value to Tie my Shoes?">
      <h3 id="tie_shoes">Do I need a Core value to Tie my Shoes?</h3>
      <p>
        No, you don’t need a relevant CV just to tie your shoes. Not every
        interaction needs to be mediated by a game mechanic. Basic actions are
        designed to answer whether characters can do things that are difficult or
        challenging. If something is clearly trivial, don’t use these rules for it,
        just let it happen. Most day-to-day tasks can be assumed to be successful.
      </p>
      <p>
        What counts as “trivial” varies from person to person, of course. Even
        “day-to-day” actions can be quite impressive for those with high Nature
        scores. Demolishing a stone castle is trivial for a high-War character, as
        is designing one a for an architect with 500 years of experience.
        Demolishing a reinforced bunker quickly or designing a grand cathedral would
        still be considered challenges.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <aside title="Lateral Strategies">
      <h3 id="lateral_strategies">Lateral Strategies</h3>
      <p>
        If one wanted to tear down a door, the usual method would be to strike with
        overwhelming force. Hurl lightning or employ the Mountain-Shattering Fist,
        and the door is sure to fall.
      </p>
      <p>
        Or one could turn into a giant sloth, twenty feet tall with huge claws.
        Giant sloths sound really great at wrecking stuff.
      </p>
      <p>Is that War or Self? Which should your character use?</p>
      <p>
        The answer is normally War. War is the Nature that deals with devastation;
        it’s the clear answer. Self is about expression and the soul. If you want to
        wreck something, you’d normally use War. However, there is clearly an
        argument that it should at least be possible to tear down a door using Self.
      </p>
      <p>
        In order to use the “wrong” Nature for an action, you need to have a
        <a href="Rules.xhtml#comp_adv">Competitive Advantage</a> in that Nature or in a Profession
        related to what you’re doing. In story terms, your culture has studied and
        relied on that technology so extensively that they’ve discovered unusual
        applications for it. You can then substitute that Nature for others with a
        -1 penalty.
      </p>
      <p>
        Some substitutions make more sense tan others. Substituting Mystery for
        Trickery typically makes a fair amount of sense. Substituting War for
        Communion makes less sense, but might still be possible under fairly
        specific conditions, such as sending messages across a distance or healing
        post-traumatic stress.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <section title="Examples: Basic Actions" class="examples">
      <h3 id="bax">Examples of Basic Actions</h3>

      <p>
        Onyx Grace is trying to translate an ancient historical text on the
        nature of ghosts. They are trained as a Linguist, have a CV of
        “Knowledge for the sake of lost souls”, and have a reasonable Mystery
        score. That hits three out of the Four Questions, so eventually
        they’ll succeed.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A Returner is irritated by a sizable stone in his field. It needs to
        be moved if the plow is to get through. His CV of “My Farm” is clearly
        applicable in this case. Without magical assistance he cannot simply
        pick it up and move it. However, the player suggests that, as an
        experienced farmer, his character can probably hook up chains to an ox
        and pull the stone out. The GM thinks that’s a good enough solution,
        so that ticks the “ingenuity” box and the stone gets moved.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Mien of Honor is buried beneath a ton of rubble. The Self-Preservation
        CV certainly applies here, but they do not have enough War or Industry
        to move the materials, nor any Professions that might apply. No amount
        of ingenuity is going to help. They’re stuck beneath the stone, and
        should probably consider using
        <a href="#approaches_twists">Twists</a> to get out of this.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Drysea Noontime is creating a piece of artwork suitable for exhibit.
        The GM requires Artist 2 and Communion 3 for this particular audience.
        She has Artist 3 and Communion 4, so there’s no problem there. She
        also has a CV entitled “Immortality Through Art,” which definitely
        applies. The player isn’t feeling very inventive, and can’t think up a
        description of the piece, but there’s no need to – three of the Four
        Questions are a “yes,” so Drysea creates a beautiful work of art.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Linker of Rings should be able to navigate the local legal system
        easily. She has Mystery 3, Lawyer 3, and “Loopholes are my friends” as
        a CV. The GM would prefer to throw some plot in the way, and offers
        her player a few Twists via the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>. Linker’s
        player thinks about it for a few seconds and takes the Twists. Linker
        gets her legal terms confused.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Star-Seeker is attempting to convince a group of Sovereigns that they
        wish to purchase many lakh-thaums of flow from him and not from
        another. The GM rules that because this is an opposed action, it is a
        conflict, and the Four Questions do not apply. They turn to
        the <a href="Rules.xhtml#conflict">conflict rules</a>.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Last Gleam of the Cerulean Skin is weathering an ice storm. He didn’t
        come to the Basin prepared for this. The Self-Preservation CV comes
        into play, but he has Industry 1 and no rating in Explorer. With no
        way to check off more than two of the four Questions, Gleam’s player
        starts looking at the Twist rules instead.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Conformity of the High Canals wants to move a ley line. He has
        Industry 4 and Theurge 3, but no relevant Core Value. His player
        suggests hiring some local assistants who might bring more enthusiasm
        to the job. The GM rules that this will also need a
        <a href="#rituals">Ritual</a>,
        since it’s a fairly large undertaking, so those assistants will
        come in handy in more ways than one.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Delight, who Stormed the Walls, is building a soul repository to trap
        one of her enemies. The GM rules that this
        <a href="#rituals">Ritual</a> requires Self 3 and
        Theurge 3. Delight has Self 3, and a CV entitled “Hunt them until the
        end”, but no Theurge skill. Her player suggests that Delight could
        change one of her own CVs to match one of her opponent’s and thus
        create a mystic connection between them through which the soul-trap
        could work. The GM points out that quickly changing one’s Core Values
        is a Self 5 task. Delight’s player considers spending the time to
        alter her CVs the slow way, but decides not to play through that sort
        of experience and gives up on the task. Delight will just have to trap
        her opponent a different way.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        The Book that Breaks the Truth wants to create some fancy magical
        topiary that can come to life. The GM calls this Trickery 2, Farmer 2.
        Unfortunately, Book is a prolocutor, not a gardener. They have
        Trickery 5 (with Competitive Advantage!), and a “Catch them by
        surprise” CV, but no Farmer profession. They don’t even have Theurge
        (Earthpower) or Explorer to substitute for it, and Book’s player is
        out of ideas for how to do the magic. Book spends a point of Reserve
        to switch a question from “no” to “maybe”, and then uses their
        Competitive Advantage in Trickery to switch the “maybe” to a “yes”.
        That’s three “yes” scores, and some awful grubby-looking magical
        topiary is the result.
      </p>
    </section>

    <aside title="The Consequences of Failure">
      <h3 id="consequences_of_failure">The Consequences of Failure</h3>
      <p>
        Because of the all-or-nothing nature of basic actions, the consequences of
        failure can sometimes seem severe, as in the example above with the person
        trapped under a ton of rubble. Remember that after a player’s character
        fails at a critical action, the next step is typically the use of Twists. If
        a Complication arises because of this, that’s exactly how the game is
        supposed to work.
      </p>
      <p>
        Not all failures are life-ending. Some simply indicate that the character
        isn’t capable of solving the problem quickly enough or decisively enough.
        Sometimes you simply accept the failure and move on.
      </p>
      <p>
        Failure on the Four Questions does not constitute a Complication and does
        not provide Twists unless the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a> or <a href="Rules.xhtml#worst_enemy">Worst Enemy Rule</a> are in
        place.
      </p>
    </aside>

  </section>

  <section title="Conflict" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="conflict">Conflict</h2>

    <p>
      Basic actions and the Four Questions are designed to handle unopposed
      activities. However, the more exciting parts of the game happen when
      your character is facing opposition.
    </p>

    <h3>Conflict Summary</h3>

    <p>When characters come into conflict, follow these steps:</p>

    <ol>
      <li>
        Each side adds a Core Value and a Profession together, then multiplies
        by a Nature score to get a total.
      </li>

      <li>
        Declare goals and intended Complications or Advantages based on the
        difference in totals (see below).
      </li>

      <li>
        Describe the conflict, especially how the effects of the conflict
        occur.
      </li>
    </ol>

    <h3 id="conflict_table">Conflict Results</h3>

    <p>
      To assign Complications in a conflict, compare the two scores. The side with
      the higher score will end up with a better result, as shown below:
    </p>

    <ul>
      <li>
        <strong>Within 10% of each other:</strong> Stalemate. Both sides suffer a
        Minor Complication.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>Less than 50% difference:</strong> Narrow victory. The winner takes
        a Minor Complication, while the loser suffers a Moderate Complication.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>50% difference or more:</strong> Decisive victory. The winner takes
        a Minor Complication, while the loser suffers a Major Complication.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>2x or more:</strong> Crushing. The winner takes a Trivial
        Complication, and the loser suffers a Critical Complication.
      </li>
      <li>
        <strong>3x or more:</strong> No contest. The loser is at the winner’s mercy,
        taking a Critical Complication while the winner is unharmed.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <aside title="Trading Complication for Advantage">
      <h3 id="comp_for_adv">Trading Complication for Advantage</h3>
      <p>
        Complications are flexible, but they describe only negative effects. If you
        are looking for a more positive effect, you can trade in your ability to
        inflict a Complication to get an Advantage for yourself. The level of
        Advantage you gain is the same as the level of the Complication you would
        have inflicted.
      </p>
      <p>
        Just like Complications, Advantages need to make sense in terms of the
        conflict that creates them. For instance, if you are falsifying bank records
        for your own benefit, it makes sense that you could create an Advantage that
        describes your increased wealth. On the other hand, if you’re shooting
        someone from beyond the horizon, using your Advantage to gain secret
        information probably doesn’t make much sense.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <h3>Conflict in Detail</h3>

    <p>
      Conflict occurs when one character’s goals are incompatible with
      another’s and they are unable or unwilling to come to a compromise. When
      it becomes clear that this is the case, every side involved should state
      their goal explicitly. This is a player-level statement – the characters
      may not realize each other’s true goals, or even that they are in a
      conflict at first. (See
      <a href="Rules.xhtml#subtle_conflicts">Subtle Conflict</a> for
      more about how to handle this.) However, the stakes should always be
      clear to the players.
    </p>

    <p>
      The consequences of a conflict come in the form of Complications and
      Advantages. Unlike Complications accepted to fuel Approaches, these
      Complications do not provide Twists, nor do the Advantages cost Twists.
    </p>

    <p>
      Each side should have a particular effect in mind going into the
      conflict, one that can represent the character’s actions and intentions
      accurately in game or story terms. Only one item from a particular level
      should be chosen. If you inflict a Complication on your foe, you cannot
      choose more than one effect. You also cannot buy multiple weaker
      Complications instead of a more serious one – for instance, you can’t
      trade in a Major (5) for a Minor (3) and two Trivial (1) Complications.
      However, you can choose to show mercy and inflict a single lesser
      Complication if you desire.
    </p>

    <p>
      While we will refer to Complications as the typical outcome of a
      conflict for ease of writing, it is typically possible to gain an
      Advantage rather than inflicting a Complication if you prefer.
    </p>

    <p>
      Along with your goal, you should state which CV, Nature, and Profession
      your character will use to achieve it. If you lack a suitable
      Profession, you cannot achieve that goal.
    </p>

    <p>
      Once you have your goal and its means stated, add the levels of the
      relevant Core Value and Profession, then multiply that by your Nature
      score to get a total. You should end up with a score between 0 and about
      50. You will be comparing your total to that of your opponent using the
      <a href="#conflict_table">conflict table</a>.
    </p>

    <p>
      For example, if your total is 36, and your opponent’s total is 20, you
      have scored more than 50% higher than your opponent, but less than
      double. This puts you in the “Less than x2” level. You will take a minor
      Complication, but you will inflict a Major Complication on your
      opponent.
    </p>

    <p>
      The character with the higher score rarely comes out unscathed – both
      sides in a conflict usually take a Complication. It might even be that
      the side with the higher score doesn’t “win” in the way they would like,
      but that they exact a worse punishment on the lower-scoring side.
    </p>

    <p>
      It is vitally important to note that characters with Mystery 3+ can read
      Nature scores, Professions, CVs, and Traditions without effort, and
      characters with Communion 3+ can do the same for Core Values. As a
      result, characters are likely to know their fate before engaging in a
      conflict. The phrase “I don’t think I can do much here” should be in
      every character’s vocabulary, followed immediately by “Let’s see where I
      can be more effective.”
    </p>

    <aside title="Professions in Conflicts">
      <h4 id="professions_in_conflict">Professions in Conflicts</h4>
      <p>
        It is assumed that you will be switching tactics and pulling tricks during a
        conflict. You might use an unexpected Nature, such as intimidating people
        using Trickery (rather than War) to creep them out, or creating a complex
        contract using Industry (instead of Mystery). However, there is only one
        Profession involved. Even if you set someone up with a few verbal quips, a
        punch to the gut is still thrown with Soldier, or perhaps Athlete (Boxer).
        Your final goal is what determines the Profession involved, not the means
        that you use to achieve that goal. You can’t punch someone with Athlete
        (Boxer) and make them lose money.
      </p>
      <p>
        Someone with a very high level in a Profession is likely to be able to use
        it for more purposes, such as using Magistrate to work with a media outlet
        and release a missing-persons story. Overlap is inevitable and ok. Try to
        keep this to level 3-5 of a Profession; be more strict with characters at
        the 1 or 2 level.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <aside title="Conflicts Don’t Make Twists">
      <h4 id="no_twists">Conflicts Don’t Make Twists</h4>
      <p>
        Because it’s worth repeating: Complications resulting from
        conflicts do not get you Twists. The second you get into a
        conflict, you are bound by the Complication that results,
        and you get no reward for that (beyond whatever Complication you
        may inflict on your opponent).
      </p>
    </aside>

    <aside title="Adjusting Conflicts">
      <h3 id="conflict_mods">Adjusting Conflicts</h3>
      <p>
        Any abilities or technologies that give a “bonus” in conflicts give +1 to a
        character’s effective Profession + CV score, before it is multiplied by
        Nature.
      </p>
      <p>
        The GM may make simple adjustments to either side in a conflict by adding or
        subtracting up to two effective levels of Profession. For instance, a
        character trying to escape pursuit across a barren plain might suffer -1 to
        the Spy profession for lack of a place to hide, while a character using
        Locality to hide in their hometown might receive an effective +2.
      </p>
      <p>
        Characters suffering under the effects of a Complication might also be
        penalized in appropriate ways. For instance, one whose faith has been shaken
        might act with a lower Core Value, and one who is injured would have certain
        Natures reduced.
      </p>

      <h4>Competitive Advantage</h4>
      <p>
        Competitive Advantage gives a +1 in conflicts before multiplication.
      </p>

      <h4 id="teamwork_conflict">Teamwork in Conflicts</h4>
      <p>
        When working as a team, use the following table to determine the effectiveness
        of the group. Apply this bonus to the highest-score character before
        multiplying.
      </p>
      <p>
        Working alone: +0 <br />
        Two people: +1<br />
        3 – 10 people: +2<br />
        11 – 30 people: +3<br />
        31 – 100 people: +4<br />
        101 – 300 people: +5<br />
        x3 bigger = +1 more
      </p>

      <p>
        Relative bonuses generally cap out at +4. For massively parallel processes
        (e.g. economics), cap at +6 instead.
      </p>
      <p>
        If your target is large enough and structured enough, it may have one or more
        levels of the <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> descriptor.
      </p>


    </aside>

    <section title="Conflict Spot Rules">
      <h3 id="conflict_spot">Conflict Spot Rules</h3>

      <p>
        “Spot rules” are rules for specific situations that don't easily fall into
        other categories. Conflict has a lot of these.
      </p>

      <aside title="The Obligatory Instant Death Cutscene rule">
        <h4 id="oidcr">The Obligatory Instant Death Cutscene rule</h4>
        <p>
          While most characters in this game are immortal, that doesn’t mean they’re
          invincible. There are many, many things in this game that can instantly
          incapacitate your character without warning. Characters might be buried
          under a mountainside, thrown into the Red Space, paralyzed by a
          never-ending dream, turned into a frog, or chained to a rock and hurled
          off the edge of the world.
        </p>
        <p>
          Whenever the GM is about to deploy something that would remove a PC from
          play, they are obligated and required to describe a short scene detailing
          the hazard. The characters have Approaches, after all, and can often find
          ways to avoid such fates. The players should not “metagame” a way out of
          this, using knowledge their characters could not have, but are highly
          encouraged to use Twists to good effect.
        </p>
        <p>
          The OIDCR does not generate Twists on its own. See
          <a href="#sources_of_twists">Sources of Twists</a> for things that
          do, and ways for tapped-out players to get a few Twists in this kind of
          situation.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Large-Scale Conflicts">
        <h4 id="large_scale_conf">Large-Scale Conflicts</h4>
        <p>
          Conflicts between groups large and organized enough to qualify for the
          Infrastructure descriptor use the Large-Scale Complications and other
          <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> rules.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Attacking Infrastructure">
        <h4 id="atk_infr">Attacking Infrastructure</h4>
        <p>
          Some groups and objects in Sorc have the <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> descriptor.
          From individual city-states at Infrastructure I to entire
          civilizations at Infrastructure III, they are substantially more durable
          and effective in conflicts. When a small group or single person is in a
          Conflict against something with Infrastructure, use these rules.
        </p>

        <p>
          First, the larger group applies the maximum Teamwork bonus (see the
          <a href="teamwork_conflict">Teamwork in Conflicts</a> rules) for the type of conflict
          involved: +4 for most conflicts, +6 for highly parallel ones.
        </p>

        <p>
          Second, if the larger group would suffer a Complication, the level of that
          Complication is reduced by one step for each level of Infrastructure (e.g.
          from Moderate to Minor). If the smaller group also has Infrastructure, use
          the difference in levels to find the reduction. This reduction also
          applies to any Advantage the smaller party might try to gain. Finally,
          when applying Complications to a target with Infrastructure, use the
          <a href="Rules.xhtml#large_fx">Large-Scale Effects</a> list. The normal set of Effects is designed
          for human-level conflicts, and the Effect chart in that section is a
          better choice for such large-scale effects.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Multiple Opponents">
        <h4 id="multiple_opponents">Multiple Opponents</h4>
        <p>
          When three or more people are in a single conflict, first make sure that
          their goals do indeed conflict with each other. You may be able to
          simplify this down to several one-on-one conflicts. If several people team
          up to take down a larger threat, and then squabble amongst themselves,
          treat it as two regular conflicts, one after another.
          Use the <a href="#teamwork_conflict">teamwork rules</a>.
        </p>
        <p>
          In the case of a true free-for-all, with many conflicting goals and each
          participant (or group) out for themselves, things can easily ratchet up in
          intensity. You are allowed to inflict Complications on each and every
          participant you face, based on the difference in your scores. You do not
          have to inflict Complications on everyone if there are people you would
          rather leave out of the affair, but it is your option to inflict one if
          your score allows it.
        </p>
        <p>
          Multiple opponents cannot escalate separately against a single target so
          as to leave one person un-escalated. Escalations affect the entire
          conflict.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Conflicting Goals">
        <h4 id="conflicting_goals">Conflicting Goals</h4>
        <p>
          You’ve found the spy in your ranks, and are chasing him down. You have
          only a narrow advantage – if you escalate, you can exact a Major
          Complication, but the spy gets a Moderate Complication in return. The spy
          chooses “your foe escapes unharmed” to represent his escape; you choose
          “kidnapped” to represent the capture. What happens?
        </p>
        <p>
          What happens is that you both must choose new goals. The original question
          of the chase may remain unanswered, or may be obvious given the situation,
          but this system rarely allows for a pure “zero-sum” conflict where one
          side is the untouched winner and the other loses completely.
        </p>
        <p>
          You might choose “Important Secrets Revealed”, while the spy might choose
          “Befriended by the Enemy”. You get the information you want from the spy,
          but in the process, he earns your trust. Who wouldn’t let their friend go
          in such a situation?
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Escape!">
        <h4 id="escape">Escape!</h4>
        <p>
          Characters who have been caught and are in a conflict they want no part of
          may simply wish to escape. You may gain a Minor (3) Advantage to state
          that you have escaped, but that you suffer the effects of your opponent’s
          assault. If you can get to the Moderate (5) level, you can declare that
          you escape unharmed, and your foe cannot target you with a Complication,
          though she may still gain an Advantage.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Subtle Conflicts">
        <h4 id="subtle_conflicts">Subtle Conflicts</h4>
        <p>
          Particularly masterful characters may be able to defeat others without
          having them even realize they have been bested. Reduce your multiplier
          from Nature by 1 to completely hide your actions from your opponent,
          winning secretly. Your reduced Nature cannot exceed your regular Trickery
          score for this purpose. You may still end up suffering a Complication due
          to exhaustion or use of resources.
        </p>
        <p>
          In certain low-tech situations, where some characters have Natures rated
          below 2, it is easier for high-powered characters to enter into a subtle
          conflict. For instance, a Returner would be unlikely to recognize the
          effects of some of the more subtle magical curses, and may think that
          someone is just acting like a jerk. They may not realize that some
          characters are protected by divine providence, and might just assume they
          were lucky – if the effect isn’t too blatant. In such cases the GM may
          reduce or waive the usual penalty for a subtle conflict.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Escalation">
        <h4 id="escalation">Escalation</h4>
        <p>
          The conflict rules do not assume a knock-down, drag-out, anything-goes
          environment. However, as some people say, “There’s no kill like overkill.”
        </p>
        <p>
          Any character with a Core Value rated at 3 or higher can spend a point of
          Reserve to escalate a conflict. Both sides then receive a Complication one
          level higher than would otherwise be indicated. Conflicts can only be
          escalated twice: once by each side.
        </p>
        <p>
          Characters can only escalate when their Core Value aligns directly with
          the conflict in question. Characters with CVs aligned with peace,
          non-violence, and similar ideas can also spend Reserve to de‑escalate a
          conflict, mitigating Complications instead of worsening them.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Instant Kill, Not Instant Fight">
        <h4 id="instakill">Instant Kill, Not Instant Fight</h4>
        <p>
          Almost all weapons and techniques in this game are capable of doing what
          they need to in a single stroke. An unprotected and unprepared person, or
          one caught by surprise, will fall almost instantaneously before the forces
          brought to bear in high-powered combat. Fights are handled through the
          Conflict system because characters will either have the Natures to detect
          weapons brought to bear, the Expertise to have the hairs stand up on the
          back of their necks, or enough Twists to handle things via the
          <a href="#oidcr">Obligatory Instant Death Cutscene Rule</a>.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Twists Uber Alles">
        <h4 id="tua">Twists Uber Alles</h4>
        <p>
          Remember that Approaches and Twists automatically trump all other
          measures, regardless of the relative difference in other scores. A
          character with a reasonable supply of Twists can easily escape unharmed
          against massively superior opposition. Meanwhile, one with a pending
          Complication will face it, regardless of what countermeasures are
          employed.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="No Applicable Spells?">
        <h4 id="no_spells">No Applicable Spells?</h4>
        <p>
          If you’re involved in a conflict where none of the Universal Expressions
          apply (which is rare), and you have no applicable Core Expressions, and
          you can’t or won’t spend Reserve to cast a non-Core Expression, treat your
          relevant Nature score as 1.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Wands and Weapons">
        <h4 id="wands_and_weapons">Wands and Weapons</h4>
        <p>
          What happens when a Returner with War 1 picks up a hellbow rated at War 4?
          The Returner now has War 4, limited to just those purposes for which the
          bow can be used – most likely, shooting people and blowing things up.
        </p>
        <p>
          Note that those purposes don’t include defense, or keeping hold of the bow
          if someone attempts to disarm the Returner. For the purposes of inflicting
          Complications in a Conflict, the Returner uses the x4 multiplier for
          War 4. However, for the purposes of avoiding Complications, the multiplier
          drops to the Returner’s native x1. You’re effectively running two
          conflicts at once, one offensive and one defensive This can lead to a
          little more bookkeeping, but it gives a fairly sensible result.
        </p>
      </aside>
    </section>

    <section title="Conflict Advice">
      <h3 id="conflict_advice">Conflict Advice</h3>

      <aside title="Serious threats are sentient">
        <h4 id="serious_threats">Serious Threats are Sentient</h4>
        <p>
          The conflict system should be used for dealing with intelligent opponents.
          If a character is up against a non-sentient force, even a complex ritual,
          use the Four Questions to resolve the event. If you’re uncertain of where to
          draw the line, the relevant question is this: Does the obstacle in your
          character’s way have Core Values? If not, it’s not sentient and should be
          addressed with the Four Questions.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Contest vs. Conflict">
        <h4 id="contest_vs_conflict">Contest vs. Conflict</h4>
        <p>
          Some head-to-head interactions are not conflicts in the way this system
          handles them. Contests of strength or speed, comparisons of pure skill, and
          situations where no one stands to truly lose anything might be contests, but
          they’re not Conflicts. For such purposes you can simply compare Nature or
          Profession scores, using other scores or Competitive Advantage to break
          ties. Conflicts are situations where there is some interplay between the
          people involved. They are situations where power, skill, and willpower are
          all necessary. Most importantly, they are situations where losing is
          meaningful, and many outcomes are possible. If that isn’t true in your
          situation, don’t use the conflict rules to handle it.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Tactics vs. Strategy">
        <h4 id="tactics_strat">Tactics vs. Strategy</h4>
        <p>
          In most games, you as a player are responsible for your characters’ tactics
          during a conflict. Your choice of whether to go for the high ground or hide
          behind a barrier, which opponent to flank and which to attack directly, etc.
          can make a big difference in how a conflict plays out and who ends up as the
          eventual winner.
        </p>
        <p>
          This game doesn’t have that. Your <strong>character</strong> is the one
          responsible for <strong>tactical</strong> decisions. You can choose to
          expand that and play through those choices, or you can just hide that step
          behind the conflict resolution mechanics. Either way, you as a player don’t
          need to worry about whether your choices are right for your character
          tactically. Your character takes care of that on their own.
        </p>
        <p>
          Instead, <strong>you</strong> are in charge of your character’s
          <strong>strategic</strong> decisions. You choose which conflicts to take
          part in and how. You decide what sort of Complications to accept or inflict,
          and what Advantages to gain. You handle the long-term decisions rather than
          the blow-by-blow decisions.
        </p>
        <p>
          Sorcerously Advanced is a game where you typically know whether you can win
          a conflict before it starts. The question is not “Will the dice land in our
          favor?” but instead, “What can I do with my loss to ensure my team’s
          victory?”
        </p>
      </aside>

      <aside title="Timescales">
        <h4 id="timescales">Timescales</h4>
        <p>
          Your chosen Effects should be achievable on the same timescale as your
          opponent’s. If someone assaults you with an axe and an intent to do grievous
          bodily harm, responding with a carefully orchestrated whisper campaign is
          not going to stop you from ending up in multiple pieces. If Mystery is your
          thing, perhaps predicting their movements or Spirit-Walking your way out
          will help you come out with only minor wounds. If your opponent in a
          long-term action comes back with a shorter-term goal, you can feel free to
          revise yours in order to match theirs. You can return to your previous
          efforts afterward, pending the results of the conflict.
        </p>

        <p>
          Switching a conflict to a shorter timescale can sometimes be very useful. It forces
          your opponent into a faster conflict, presumably one where you have
          the advantage. However, winning the short conflict will not give
          you the same results as winning the longer one. If you’re sick of
          a political debate, you can interrupt it with a fistfight, but it
          might not get you the results you’re looking for.
        </p>
      </aside>

    </section>


    <section title="Examples: Conflicts" class="examples">
      <h3 id="conx">Example Conflicts</h3>

      <p>
        There has been a strange discovery near a Nova Commonwealth city, and
        the Archive wants to be first to examine it. Since the Archive
        genuinely believes it might be dangerous, their representative tries
        to impress that upon the Nova representative. For their part, Nova has
        several people who would love to investigate first, so they try to
        convey the primacy of their claim.
      </p>

      <p>
        Archivist: Communion 3, Prolocutor 3, “Knowledge for a Better Future”
        core value rated at 3. Total score: 3 x (3+3) = 18.
      </p>

      <p>
        Nova representative: Communion 4, Politician 2, “Keep our Researchers
        Happy” core value at 3. Total score: 4 x (2+3) = 20.
      </p>

      <p>
        Nova’s advantage is just barely above 10%. They take a minor
        complication – the Archive is likely to bring this up as leverage in
        future negotiations, but they get nothing today. The Archivist takes a
        Moderate Complication: either long-lasting, having major impact, or
        yielding substantial information. The representative picks the latter:
        they give the Archivists permission to investigate, but everything
        they learn will have to pass through the Commonwealth’s researchers
        before they send it back to the Archive.
      </p>

      <p>
        Note that this is not a “take it or leave it” offer; this is what the
        Archivist agrees to when they leave the negotiating table. Both sides
        consider it a binding deal.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Sunflower Irony-Master, a necromancer of the Subtle Path, sneaks into
        the lair of the sleeping dragon Thyophrax, ready to battle it for its
        hoard, which contains a lost artifact. This may not have been the best
        idea.
      </p>

      <p>
        Sunflower: War 2, Soldier 2, “Unmitigated Greed” 4. Total score: 2 x
        (2+4) = 12.
      </p>

      <p>
        Thyophrax: War 5, Battle 4, “Hunger for Gems” 3. Total score: 5 x
        (4+3) = 35.
      </p>

      <p>
        “Uh... that’s a lot” says Sunflower’s player. “Can I use Trickery
        instead? I’m way better at Trickery.”
      </p>

      <p>
        “Well, Sunflower has enough Mystery that they’d know Thyophrax’s
        scores. Do you want to step back and not have declared battle?” asks
        the GM.
      </p>

      <p>“I get to take it back?” asks the player.</p>

      <p>“Sure. Just ask me what the scores are beforehand next time.”</p>

      <p>“Ok. How’s its Mystery score?”</p>

      <p>
        “Normally 4, but the mighty Thyophrax was asleep when you snuck in, so
        let’s call it 2.”
      </p>

      <p>“Yeah, let’s try sneaking instead.”</p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Sunflower, a necromancer of the Subtle Path, attempts to sneak past the
        dragon Thyophrax and steal a single treasure from its hoard.
      </p>

      <p>
        Sunflower: Trickery 5, Spy 3, “Unmitigated Greed” 4. Total score: 5 x
        (3+4) = 35.
      </p>

      <p>
        Thyophrax: Mystery 2, Spy-eater 2, “Hunger for Gems” 3. Total score: 2
        x (2+3) = 10.
      </p>

      <p>
        Sunflower’s score is in the “3x or more” category. They take the
        treasure and leave, with the dragon none the wiser.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A Returner sailor comes back from time spent in the dangerous outside.
        Two young toughs try to rough her up for her money.
      </p>

      <p>
        Sailor: War 1, Soldier 2, “Pride and Valor” core value rated at 3.
        Total score: 1 x (2+3) = 5.
      </p>

      <p>
        Toughs: War 1, Soldier 1, “I deserve things” core value at 1, +1
        Teamwork. Total score: 1 x (1+1+1) = 3.
      </p>

      <p>
        The sailor is between 50% more and x2 the toughs’ total score, so this
        falls into “less than x2” category. The sailor takes a minor
        complication, while the toughs take a major one. The sailor’s player
        chooses to inflict some major injuries on the toughs, effectively
        depriving them of War and Soldier until they heal up. The toughs’
        player decides that escaping is a pretty good idea here, so they use a
        minor advantage to escape (but not without harm).
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Caller of Councils, a Nova administrator, is negotiating with
        Flow-Keeper, a merchant from Those Above. Caller is trying to get a
        good deal for the diversion of a massive ley line.
      </p>

      <p>
        Flow-Keeper: Trickery 4, Merchant 3, “Bring Home The Bacon” 3. Total
        score: 4 x (3+3) = 24.
      </p>

      <p>
        Caller: Mystery 3, Merchant 3, “Watch the Bottom Line” 4. Total score:
        3 x (3 + 4) = 21.
      </p>

      <p>
        Flow-keeper has a better than 10% advantage, but not by much, so this
        falls into the “less than 50%” category. Flow-keeper’s player chooses
        a Moderate Advantage: a small but long-term monetary gain. Caller’s
        player chooses to inflict a Minor Complication. Minor items have to be
        something that isn’t a big deal right now but could add up in the long
        term. Caller’s player says that Flow-keeper’s haggling is trying the
        patience of Nova Commonwealth, and if they do it too much things will
        get difficult for them.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Many Archive missions revolve around an archaeological dig. The dig
        itself doesn’t have an “opponent”, per se, or if it does they’re long
        dead. Only thinking beings count as opponents and trigger the conflict
        rules. For a dig, use the Basic Actions or Rituals rules.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Thin Line of Golden Dust, a Glimmermere artist, chases after a thief
        that stole their treasured magical pigments. This conflict could take
        many forms:
      </p>

      <p>
        If Line is running, relying on their own personal speed and agility,
        they would probably use War.
      </p>

      <p>
        If Line is flying by means of levitation or a magical object, they
        would use Industry.
      </p>

      <p>
        On the other hand, if Line wants to shapeshift into an appropriate
        form (bird, fish, cheetah, adding wings to themselves, etc.), they
        would use Self.
      </p>

      <p>
        Regardless of the Nature used, the right Profession is almost
        certainly Athlete.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        One Hand’s Grace, a Diadem noble, is trying to bluff their way through
        a negotiation, intimating that they already have the upper hand in the
        search for an artifact and their opponent might as well give up. The
        Sight that Turns the Leaf, a Worldbuilder treasure hunter on the other
        side, remain suspicious.
      </p>

      <p>
        Grace: Trickery 4, Merchant 4, “For My House” 3. Total score: 4 x
        (4+3) = 28.
      </p>

      <p>
        Sight: Mystery 3, Magistrate 3, “Dig Deep” 3. Total score:
        3 x (3+3) = 18.
      </p>

      <p>
        This puts Grace just barely into the “Less than 2x” category. This
        nets them a major effect to use against Sight: something both
        long-term and powerful. Grace’s player decides that Sight leaves while
        Grace gets the artifact. Sight’s player gets a minor effect, and they
        use it to start building a case against Grace, painting them as
        untrustworthy.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Unwavering Eye, an Ægis shieldbearer, stands on watch, while The
        Potentate of the End, a Sovereign troublemaker, commands their demons
        to sneak them through the area unseen.
      </p>

      <p>
        Unwavering Eye: Mystery 4, Magistrate 2, “Hold the line” 3. Total
        score: 4 x (2+3) = 20.
      </p>

      <p>
        Potentate: Mystery 4, Spy 4, “Transgression” 3. Total score: 4 x (4+3)
        = 28.
      </p>

      <p>
        This falls into the “less than 50%” category. The Potentate declares
        “escape without injury” as their Moderate Advantage, while Unwavering
        Eye deals a Minor Complication: it took more time than Potentate
        wanted. If they’re delayed again things could get dicey.
      </p>

      <p>
        Note that while The Potentate undoubtedly knows arts like the Shroud
        and Spirit-walking, and Unwavering Eye is talented with the Sixth
        Sense, these fold into the background for many conflicts. They explain
        how the characters are competing, rather than letting them skip the
        contest.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Verity, who Built the Stair, an Unroyal citizen, confronts Scale of
        Tower Twelve, a Geometer, about their civilization’s alliance with
        Diadem, explaining Diadem’s many crimes. Scale doesn’t want to hear it
        – they like the Diadem, though they don’t have any specific CV related
        to them.
      </p>

      <p>
        Verity: Communion 3, Prolocutor 3, “Let No One Reign” 4. Total score:
        3 x (3+4) = 21.
      </p>

      <p>
        Scale: Self 3, Lawyer 2, no applicable CV. Total score: 3 x (2+0) = 6.
      </p>

      <p>
        This is an absolutely crushing victory, with Verity in the “x3 or
        more” category. A Critical Complication will let Verity give Scale a
        Core Value against Diadem, bringing them into the cause.
      </p>

      <p>
        If Verity’s player had been a bit more greedy – for instance, trying
        to turn Scale into a rabidly violent anti-Diadem terrorist – the
        Self-Control CV would have come into effect, and the conversation
        wouldn’t have gone nearly as well. Sometimes it pays to tone back your
        Complications.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A group of Unroyal are fleeing from pursuing Diadem forces, using the
        Travel lattice. One of them, Liberty, holds the line against a
        half-dozen of Diadem’s warriors to buy her compatriots time. Note that
        the lattice is a -1 Null Zone, which leads to reduced Nature and
        Profession scores. These are already taken into account below.
      </p>

      <p>
        Liberty: War 2, Soldier 2, “Let None Rule You” 4. Total score:
        2 x (2+4) = 12.
      </p>

      <p>
        Diadem warriors: War 3, Soldier 2, “Embrace Duty” 3. Teamwork modifier
        for six of them: +2. Total score: 3 x (2+3+2) = 21.
      </p>

      <p>
        This puts Diadem’s warriors in the “less than x2” category. Normally,
        they would take a Minor Complication, while Liberty would take a major
        one.
      </p>

      <p>
        Liberty’s player decides that’s not enough. They escalate, spending a
        point of Reserve, and also spend a Shift. Liberty will take a critical
        complication, but Diadem’s warriors will suffer a major one. Liberty’s
        allies make a clean escape as she moves like lightning and strikes
        like thunder.
      </p>

      <p>
        Diadem’s player decides that for the Critical Complication, the
        warriors finally tear into Liberty, rendering her unconscious and
        throwing her over the edge, setting her drifting through the Travel
        lattice.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        One of the PCs wants to show off their athletic talent with a
        newly-encountered Unruly Land, challenging them to their own game.
      </p>

      <p>
        If the outcome is not important to the plot, just pick a winner based
        on Nature and Profession and move on with it. Don’t use Complications
        and Advantages for low-stakes events.
      </p>

      <p>
        If the athlete’s goal is to impress the citizens of this new land,
        those are high enough stakes to use a Conflict. It might look like
        this:
      </p>

      <p>
        Athlete: Communion 3, Athlete 2, “Don’t Hold Back” 3. Total score: 3 x
        (2+5) = 15.
      </p>

      <p>
        Newcomers: Self 2, Athlete 3, “Go Team Go” 3. Total score: 2 x (3+3) =
        12.
      </p>

      <p>
        Note that the athlete is using Communion, not a more body-oriented
        Nature like Self or War. That’s because the goal here is to connect
        with others, not to win the game. If you win the game but look like a
        jerk, that defeats the purpose here.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        An Archive researcher races against their foes in the Fellowship of
        Truth, each trying to decipher an ancient tablet before the other.
        This isn’t really a good use of the Conflict rules – there’s no
        back-and-forth here, no real interaction between the characters.
        Instead, treat it like a <a href="Rules.xhtml#rituals">Ritual</a>,
        tracking the time it takes to finish.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        An Archive researcher races against their foes in the Fellowship of
        Truth, each trying to decipher an ancient tablet before the other. In
        addition, each side has dispatched agents to slow down the other side
        and (if possible) steal their results. This is a Conflict happening in
        the middle of a Ritual. Use the Ritual rules to see how long each side
        will take. If there’s enough time to sneak in and sabotage the other
        side, run the conflict. Typically a conflict like this would use
        Mystery or Trickery, with professions like Criminal or Spy.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A magus from the Fellowship of Truth tries to convince a Sovereign to
        turn against their fellows, arguing that betrayal is the sweetest
        transgression.
      </p>

      <p>
        Magus: Trickery 4, Politician 2, “The Old ways” 3. Total score: 4 x
        (2+3) = 20.
      </p>

      <p>
        Sovereign: Self 4, Prolocutor 2, “Transgression” -3, “Every Soul a
        Fortress” 4. Total score: 4 x (2–3+4) = 12.
      </p>

      <p>
        Note that the Sovereign’s Transgression CV counts against their total
        in this case. They can still apply “Every Soul a Fortress” to resist.
      </p>

      <p>
        The magus is in the “Less than x2” category, letting them dole out a
        Major Complication to the Sovereign – probably something like
        “Planning to turn on my friends at the right moment.” Of course, if
        someone finds out, they might be able to convince the Sovereign that
        turning around and betraying the person who convinced you to betray
        people was even better.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A smooth-tongued criminal is being held in prison by a Returner cult.
        They are due to be executed in the morning. The criminal has Trickery
        5 and Politician 4, but this is a -1 Null Zone.
      </p>

      <p>
        Criminal: Trickery 4, Politician 3, “Self-Preservation” 4. Total
        score: 4 x (3+4) = 28.
      </p>

      <p>
        Returner: Self 1, Magistrate 1, “Self-Preservation” 4. Total score: 1
        x (1+4) = 5.
      </p>

      <p>
        “Bam. That’s a more than 5-times advantage. I want to talk him into
        handing me the keys and killing himself,” says the player.
      </p>

      <p>
        “Well that’s disturbing,” says the GM. “Also, I’m looking at the
        Trickery-nature page and it feels like that’s out of scope. Trickery
        just doesn’t make you convincing enough fast enough to talk someone
        into killing themselves. Why don’t you just use Trickery to walk out
        of the cell?”
      </p>

      <p>
        “Come on, I can get like double a Critical Complication on this guy!”
      </p>

      <p>“I know, but not that one. Not in the amount of time you’ve got.”</p>

      <p>
        “Ok, fine. How about I make him realize his career and belief system
        are a sham and he lets me out?”
      </p>

      <p>
        “So kinda like the Complications where you rewrite someone’s CVs?”
      </p>

      <p>“Yeah.”</p>

      <p>
        “Ok, that sounds better. After an hour or two of conversation with
        you, the guard doubts everything he’s done for the past ten years. He
        goes home to rethink his life and leaves you with the keys.”
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        Magnesium Flare, an enraged Glimmermere war artist, strikes out with
        prismatic blasts of energy against the city that spurned their offers
        of artistic work.
      </p>

      <p>
        The GM needs to decide how to assign the city’s statistics for this
        purpose. For Nature, she picks the average of the citizens’ Industry
        rating, since that’s what created the buildings. For Profession, she
        uses the average Samaritan rating of the city’s emergency response
        teams. Finally, she assigns those teams a generic “Protect Others” CV
        at 3.
      </p>

      <p>
        Flare: War 4, Theurge (Glory) 3, “Famous or Infamous” 5. Total score:
        4 x (3+5) = 32.
      </p>

      <p>
        The City: Industry 3, Samaritan 2, “Protect Others” 3. Infrastructure
        I. Total score: 3 x (2+3+4) = 27.
      </p>

      <p>Note the city’s extra +4 bonus from its Infrastructure rating.</p>

      <p>
        Flare has an advantage between 10% and 50%. This delivers a Moderate
        complication while taking a Minor one. Flare, being quite upset,
        decides to escalate, spending a point of Reserve to increase the
        Complications to Major and Moderate.
      </p>

      <p>
        The city’s Infrastructure advantage reduces the complication it takes
        to Moderate. Flare would like to escalate again, but any particular
        side only gets to do it once.
      </p>

      <p>
        Flare would like to devastate buildings and vaporize bystanders. The
        city’s defenders would like to ensure that no one gets harmed. The GM
        decides that these two goals are probably in conflict with one
        another, and both sides must choose new Complications.
      </p>

      <p>
        After some consideration, Flare’s player says that they instead
        threaten the city with certain devastation if they are scorned. A
        low-impact but long-term complication sows fear in the population.
        Flare’s player could reasonably ask for a temporary “Fear-driven” Core
        Value to work with when they talk with the city’s citizens in the
        future.
      </p>

      <p>
        The city, in response to the threat, picks a short-term but
        high-impact complication: they capture and imprison Flare in
        expectation of a trial.
      </p>
    </section>

    <aside title="Don’t Overuse Conflict">
      <h3 id="overuse_conflict">Don’t Overuse Conflict</h3>
      <p>
        You can use the conflict system for every single interpersonal event
        in the game. It’s not a good idea. Conflict is designed to handle
        situations where the outcome is vitally important. These are situations
        of serious competition, or where those involved feel a strong need
        to impose their will on others or stop said imposition. Normal
        conversation is not a conflict. Even strongly-worded arguments,
        even between high-Trickery individuals, are not necessarily conflicts.
      </p>
    </aside>

  </section>

  <section title="Rituals" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="rituals">Rituals</h2>

    <p>
      Characters often want to create a long-standing asset to solve a
      problem: a new cure for a necromantic disease, a curse with a peculiar
      effect, an army of automata, a ward against a newfound power, even a
      secret society. That’s what this system is for. Characters apply their
      intelligence and knowledge, as well as their myriad technological
      resources in the form of Reserve, to speed their ritual to completion.
    </p>

    <p>
      This section lays out the rules for accomplishing ritual magic and gives
      some examples for what you can accomplish with it. What we don’t talk
      about here is what you can do quickly with magic, without a ritual. Some
      of that is described in the
      <a href="CharGen.xhtml#natures">Natures section</a> of the Character Creation
      chapter, but the <a href="Magic.xhtml#spell_list">Expression list</a> in the
      Magic chapter describes what you can accomplish in much greater detail.
      Spells with the “Ritual” <a href="Magic.xhtml#descriptors">descriptor</a>
      always require a ritual to cast.
    </p>

    <p>
      To plan out your ritual, you should first determine the Nature score
      required for your ritual. The Nature itself (Mystery, War, etc.) is
      typically obvious. Sometimes the level will also be obvious, as for
      someone who wants to make a “cloak that hides things like Trickery 4”.
      Other times, the player and GM will need to talk and compare the ritual
      to existing works. Someone who wants to design a new kind of synergistic
      Rapport, for example, might set it as one level higher than existing
      Rapport techniques.
    </p>

    <p>Next, determine the general type of the ritual:</p>

    <p>
      <strong>Great Works:</strong> Projects that have long- lasting impact on
      society or fundamental metaphysics. Setting up a new colony, replacing a
      government, building a society, implementing a continent-sized
      transportation network, or discovering new principles of sorcery. Great
      works take a baseline of 50 years and can substantially change the game.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Major Rituals:</strong> Incremental improvements to existing
      technology, or rapid social change. Speeding up a magical process,
      creating a new Expression, curing a new and unknown disease, or changing
      corporate organization by implementing a known management method. Major
      projects take a baseline of 5 years and can alter large regions or
      groups.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Minor Rituals:</strong> Use of existing technology in a
      substantial manner, or making minor modifications to an existing
      technology. Developing a new curse or countercurse, creating a new
      building, running an advertising campaign, inoculating a village, or
      training an animal to complete a complex task. Minor projects take a
      baseline of 3 months and typically have local or minor impact.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Craft Rituals:</strong> Making something from a template or
      performing something well-practiced. Learning to play a song, assembling
      a set of furniture, knitting a scarf, performing weather-working or
      healing, or cleaning out the basement. Craft projects take 12 hours and
      typically have a small, immediate, tangible product.
    </p>

    <p>
      These can change some based on the physical or metaphysical size of
      what’s being done. Weather-working is normally a Craft ritual, but
      someone who wanted to affect an island could use it as a Minor ritual,
      or conduct a Great Work to permanently affect an entire continent.
    </p>

    <p>
      The times listed above assume that you have
      <a href="ritual_reqs">enough magical power available</a>,
      either within yourself or through nearby
      infrastructure, and that you have the appropriate Profession rated at 2.
    </p>

    <p>
      Some projects require more than one Nature. For example, designing
      something new will often be a Mystery task, while implementing that
      design will invoke other Natures. Model this by setting two separate
      Nature requirements for the project. Characters gain time steps (below)
      from the most advantageous Nature score that applies, not from both of
      them.
    </p>

    <p>
      Once you have determined the project’s Nature score, you’ll be moving up
      or down the <a href="#time_ladder">Time Ladder</a>. Apply these
      guidelines:
    </p>

    <ul>
      <li>
        Each increase in Profession or Nature moves you down the time ladder
        one step.
      </li>
      <li>
        Access to outside resources (such as a Universal Repository) moves you
        down the time ladder one step.
      </li>
      <li>
        The GM may rule some tasks to be particularly simple (down one step)
        or complex (up one step). Altering the skill level required is also
        reasonable for complex or simple rituals, but the required Profession
        rating should never exceed 3.
      </li>
      <li>
        If your ritual requires Infrastructure to work (see
        <a href="ritual_reqs">“What do rituals require?”</a>)
        and your current region is short one
        level, add 3 steps. If you are short 2 levels, you cannot attempt this
        ritual.
      </li>
      <li>
        If your ritual would affect an entire group with an Infrastructure
        rating, increase the time. Infrastructure I adds 2 steps, II adds 4
        steps, and III adds 6 steps. You may also need a successful Conflict
        to pull off this project. For rituals even more vast, see
        <a href="#virtual_infrastructure">virtual infrastructure levels</a>.
      </li>
      <li id="ritual_teamwork">
        If you have people capable of helping, divide the time by [your
        <a href="#teamwork_conflict">Teamwork modifier</a> plus one]. If you yourself have the
        Infrastructure descriptor, use the +4 Teamwork modifier that you
        usually receive – you divide times by 5.
      </li>
      <li>
        If you are attempting a Ritual where you do not have a related Core
        Expression, invest an additional point of Reserve (see below).
      </li>
    </ul>

    <p>
      You can conduct a single ritual at a time, or two with Mystery or Self
      at 3 or higher, or three with both rated 3 or higher (though you will
      eventually need to sleep). You cannot work “double shifts” on the same
      ritual to speed it up – some things just take time.
    </p>

    <h3 id="time_ladder">Time Ladder</h3>

    <ul class="compact_list no_bullets">
      <li>100 years</li>
      <li><strong>50 years</strong> (Great Work)</li>
      <li>20 years</li>
      <li>10 years</li>
      <li><strong>5 years</strong> (Major Ritual)</li>
      <li>2 years</li>
      <li>1 year</li>
      <li>6 months</li>
      <li><strong>3 months</strong> (Minor Ritual)</li>
      <li>1 month</li>
      <li>2 weeks</li>
      <li>1 week</li>
      <li>3 days</li>
      <li>1 day</li>
      <li><strong>12 hours</strong> (Craft Ritual)</li>
      <li>6 hours</li>
      <li>3 hours</li>
      <li>1 hour</li>
      <li>30 minutes</li>
      <li>10 minutes</li>
      <li>5 minutes</li>
      <li>1 minute</li>
      <li>30 seconds</li>
      <li>10 seconds</li>
      <li>5 seconds</li>
      <li>1 second</li>
    </ul>

    <aside title="Not Whether But When">
      <h4 id="not_whether">Not Whether, But When</h4>
      <p>
        Whether or not a ritual can be completed should be referred to the Four
        Questions. In most Sorc teams, the answer is almost inevitably “yes” –
        someone in the group will have the Nature and expertise needed to complete
        the project. The ritual system answers the more difficult question of how
        much time a project will take.
      </p>
      <p>
        This is partially a metagame concern. Most groups are happy to take on
        rituals that can be completed within a day, but wary of longer-term
        endeavors that might bog down the game or be interrupted by outside events.
        Reserve helps the players choose which rituals are most worth their effort
        and focus on those.
      </p>
    </aside>


    <h3 id="ritual_reserve">Reserve Speeds Rituals</h3>

    <p>
      As mentioned in the Character Creation section, your character has a
      number of points of Reserve equal to their Power score. These points can
      be used to speed a ritual to completion.
    </p>

    <p>
      If you want to complete your ritual faster, invest Reserve in it. Every
      point of Reserve you invest moves you down the ladder one step. In this
      way you can choose which actions you want to focus on and do those more
      quickly.
    </p>

    <p>
      You cannot invest more points of Reserve in a ritual than you have
      points in an appropriate Core Value, or points in the appropriate
      Nature, whichever is lower. If you have no appropriate CV, you can still
      invest one point of Reserve per project.
    </p>

    <p>
      Reserve that is invested in a ritual stays there until the completion of
      the ritual, whether because it creates its desired effect or because you
      had to interrupt it. In the meantime, your maximum Reserve is reduced by
      the amount that you keep invested.
    </p>

    <p>
      When a ritual ends, you do not get the invested Reserve back
      immediately. You regain a point of Reserve every night that you get
      enough rest. (For characters with a high Self scores, this can be very
      little rest.) You regain an additional point while resting if you have a
      Core Value rated at 3 or higher that matches up with your current
      ritual. You cannot exceed your maximum Reserve.
    </p>

    <aside title="What does Reserve do?">
      <h3 id="reserve_reference">What does Reserve do again?</h3>

      <p>To collect most of the rules about Reserve in one place:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>
          You have a maximum number of points of Reserve equal to your current Power
          score. Even if you have a Power of 0, you will still have 1 point of
          Reserve available.
        </li>
        <li>
          You regain a point of Reserve every night that you get enough rest. You
          regain an additional point if you have a Core Value rated 3+ that matches
          up with your current Ritual. You cannot exceed your maximum Reserve.
        </li>
        <li>
          Spend a point of Reserve to switch Traditions.
          <a href="CharGen.xhtml#switching_traditions">Adjust Twists and
            Reserve appropriately</a>.
        </li>
        <li>
          Spend a point of Reserve to use a magical art that’s neither Universal nor
          part of your Core Expressions, or to substitute one Profession for a
          similar one. You can’t do specialized actions.
        </li>
        <li>
          In Basic Actions, one (and only one) point of Reserve can be spent to push
          your limits and change a “no” to a “maybe”, or a “maybe” to a “yes”.
        </li>
        <li>
          In Conflicts, one (and only one) point of Reserve can be spent to escalate
          (or de-escalate) a conflict. Every side involved will take one level
          higher Complication than would normally be incurred (or lower, for
          de-escalation). You must also have an appropriate Core Value.
        </li>
        <li>
          In Rituals, one or more points of Reserve (up to the level of an
          applicable CV) can be invested to buy steps on the time ladder. Each point
          of Reserve buys one step.
        </li>
      </ul>
    </aside>

    <h3 id="ritual_reqs">What do rituals require?</h3>

    <p>
      The term “ritual” may give the image of a single practitioner in a
      closed room, drawing symbols and cooking reagents until the project is
      done. For rituals that require Nature 2, that will do. Above that, one
      needs support.
    </p>

    <p>
      First, all magical rituals require properly-aspected flow. If you're
      near an appropriate ley line, in a region with natural aspects, or if
      you and your assistants have Aspected Earthly Forms, those are all good
      ways to do it. Other times you'll need to work out a way to produce that
      aspect before you can start.
    </p>

    <p>
      Rituals of Nature 3 require some minor resources or a number of
      assistants. A coven of witches, a tiny fork off a ley line, a set of
      troubleshooting guides stored in the Universal Repositories, or a
      well-enchanted relic will be sufficient. You’ll want to work in an area
      with Infrastructure I or better.
    </p>

    <p>
      At Nature 4 one needs serious technological support. One could use most
      of the energy from a typical ley line, a set of high-end tools, or a
      dozen willing associates. You’ll need a region with Infrastructure II or
      better.
    </p>

    <p>
      At Nature 5, rituals require most of the energy from a major ley line, a
      hundred eager cultists, access to a broad set of exceptionally pure
      reagents, or other such high-quality resources. It will be difficult to
      find this outside of an Infrastructure III region.
    </p>

    <p>
      None of this applies if you’re merely applying a higher Nature to a
      lower-level ritual. You only need these things when accomplishing
      heavier-duty tasks.
    </p>

    <p>
      Note also that the <a href="#ritual_teamwork">teamwork modifier</a> only applies once you've
      passed the threshold for starting your ritual. If you're using a dozen
      casters to achieve a Nature 4 ritual, you'll need a dozen more to get
      the first level of teamwork modifier.
    </p>

    <aside title="Rituals Make Prototypes">
      <h3 id="prototypes">Rituals Make Prototypes</h3>
      <p>
        It is important to note that rituals create prototypes, not
        production-quality items. Expect quirks in automata. Expect side-effects in
        cures. Expect minor revolts in your empire.
      </p>
      <p>
        Polishing out these imperfections takes Twist use or time. Treat this
        process as a new ritual requiring +3 time steps, with a maximum Reserve
        expenditure of 2. You can’t cut corners or throw extra power at this – you
        need careful testing and refinement.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <h3 id="ritual_benchmarks">Nature Score Benchmarks</h3>
    <p>
      If you’re not sure what Nature score a particular ritual should require, here
      are some guidelines:
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        Nature 2 covers basic mystical expressions of otherwise baseline human
        abilities. Something with Nature 2 is clearly magical, and potentially even
        world-changing, but it doesn’t do things that sheer ingenuity wouldn’t
        provide in the right circumstances. For example, someone skilled in
        exploration could find water in the wilderness, so a Industry 2 ritual could
        make an ever-full waterskin.
      </li>
      <li>
        Nature 3 is where things become impossible to understand as anything but
        magic. It crosses boundaries: between worlds, into dreams, from emotional to
        physical. It touches things that are purely magical. Communion 3 could
        create a necklace that draws a sleeper into the Dream Realms.
      </li>
      <li>
        Nature 4 acts upon the things from Nature 3. It’s a very “meta” level.
        Industry 3 can access a ley line, but Industry 4 can move it. Nature 4 can
        also make things from Nature 2 or 3 more convenient, such as when Trickery 4
        gives you your own piece of Red Space.
      </li>
      <li>
        Nature 5 gets big, fast, and serious. People from nonmagical cultures will
        probably be terrified by these things, from binding multiple souls to your
        body with Self 5 to creating a never-ending hall of mirrors with Trickery 5.
      </li>
    </ul>

    <section title="Examples: Rituals" class="examples">
      <h3 id="ritx">Example Rituals</h3>

      <p>
        Here are a few dozen things that one could do with ritual magic. As
        we’ve implied, this list is not intended to be exhaustive. It’s here
        to help you estimate the levels of your own rituals as you come up
        with new weird and amazing things magic can do in your setting.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Archaeological Dig:</strong> Retrieving a single artifact is
        Minor :: Mystery 2. Fully excavating the site of an ancient city would
        be Major.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Automata:</strong> See
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#Mystic_Servitors">Mystic Servitors</a>. Those
        rules are used regardless of what kind of servant you’re creating. If
        you’re making something with true free will, see Genesis below
        instead.
      </p>

      <p id="flow_detector">
        <strong>Automated Flow Detectors</strong>: Typically Minor :: Mystery 2.
        Many ritual devices emulate the
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#Sixth_Sense">sixth sense</a> to trigger effects based on
        particular presences or events. The different aspects of flow reflect all of
        the vast, multifaceted world of the Basin, so these triggers can be quite
        fine-grained and discriminating. One mechanism might detect an intruder in a
        tomb by seeking out life-flow. Another could find soldiers in a crowd by
        seeking out War-essence, or romantic partners by detecting bonds of love.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Body Swaps:</strong> Taking minds from two different bodies
        and switching them with one another. Craft :: Self 4 + Communion 3.
        You need permission to enact this ritual; see
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#Sovereignty">Sovereignty</a>.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Build a Secret Society:</strong> This is a Major ritual,
        requiring Nature 1 but Profession 3. If you believe in the cause, use
        Communion. Otherwise, use Trickery.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Cleaning Up Flow Pollution:</strong> This is difficult: you
        need to gather the flow and send it through a lengthy process of
        extracting or countering unwanted aspects, or pipe it away to a safe
        location. Major :: Industry 4 for a city-state-sized area, with +2
        time shifts for an <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> I target.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Communication Network:</strong> Minor for a spotty network
        that covers a city. Increase the ritual type to cover a continent, to
        improve coverage, or use Infrastructure levels to cover larger areas.
        Depending on how you’d like it to work, this could be done with
        Communion (if it’s mostly done via living relays), Industry (if it’s
        heliographs or other physical devices), or Mystery (if it’s more of a
        mutual surveillance network).
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Enchanted Items:</strong> Sometimes you want to hand someone a
        flaming sword, or give your non-magical friend a crystal ball that
        will let them contact you. As a general guideline for creating
        enchanted items that aren’t on this list, a Craft ritual will create
        an item that allows someone to use a single, limited expression of an
        Art. Good examples include farspeech with only you, healing for their
        family, or the above-mentioned flaming sword. Minor rituals expand
        that to a wide range of applications: rapport with you, healing for
        anyone who produces a certain aspect of flow, a weather-controlling
        bowl. It takes a Major ritual to expand that to all the possible uses
        of a particular art, effectively allowing someone to use an Expression
        as if they knew it themselves.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Floating Architecture:</strong> For a single building or
        castle, if you have Industry 2, this is a Major ritual. If you have
        Industry 4, it’s Minor. Increase the type to Major or Great Work to
        put neighborhoods, cities, or islands aloft.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Genesis:</strong> Creating intelligent life is
        Major :: Communion 3 + Self 3. If they are the first of their kind,
        upgrade to Great Work. Plant or animal life is typically
        Minor :: Industry 3 instead. Raise the Nature level to create larger
        life forms, or to create life that is inherently magical on its own
        (like a dragon).
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Group-Minds:</strong> Long-term use of Rapport can merge
        several minds into one as described in Sufficiently Advanced (SA2 page
        16). If you’d like to do it faster and more deliberately, it’s
        Minor :: Communion 2. Raise the nature score to 3 if you want it to
        endure when bodies are removed from each other, or 4 if you want it to
        stretch across realms of existence.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Larger On The Inside:</strong> For something you can carry
        with you (the classic bag of holding), this would be Craft :: Trickery
        4. For a house that Escher would envy, it changes to Minor :: Trickery
        3 – larger spaces take more time, but stationary ones are easier to create.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Mass Entertainment:</strong> Want to put on a show on a large
        scale? You might use Earthpower to show epic stories in the clouds,
        which would require Craft :: Communion 3, with Profession 3 required.
        Using Glory to send holy dreams to particular sleepers across a city
        is much more personalized and direct, and would count as affecting a
        group with <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> I, adding 2 time steps.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Move or Lock a Travel Lattice Point:</strong> Locking a
        latting point or towing it a few blocks is Craft :: Industry 4. Taking
        it farther away is liable to result in it simply snapping back to
        where it used to be.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>New Dream Realm:</strong> After selecting the emotion or
        mental state exemplified by your dream realm, creating it is Minor ::
        Communion 3. The appropriate profession is Theurge.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Null Zones:</strong> Major :: Industry 1, requiring Theurge 3.
        This doesn’t even require any magic; just a willingness to literally
        move mountains. Add one time step to create a -2 Null Zone, or two
        time steps for a -3.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Oblation Automaton:</strong> Sometimes you have a literal ton
        of scrolls and clay tablets and you don’t want to spend the time to
        place them all into the Universal Repositories yourself. Building a
        device to commit them on its own while you do other things would be
        Minor :: Communion 3.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Rebuild your Tools:</strong> Some Paths require that their
        followers use particular tools in order to do magic. If yours are
        destroyed, but you have the appropriate materials to recreate them,
        you can accomplish that as Craft :: Self 2.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Redirecting Ley Lines:</strong> For an ordinary ley line, this
        is Minor :: Industry 4, with +2 time shifts for an Infrastructure I
        target. Moving a particularly large ley line or a nexus may count as
        Infrastructure II, or even III for the largest ones.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong><a href="CharGen.xhtml#change_core_exp">Replace a Core Expression</a>:</strong>
        Minor :: Self 2. Any applicable Profession is ok.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Revamp a Grand Wonderwork:</strong> Maybe you’d like to improve the
        Universal Repositories’ searchability, or make the Red Space less
        horrific. Such changes are Major, requiring Nature 4 and Profession 3.
        They also require <a href="Rules.xhtml#infra">Infrastructure</a> timeshifts, which can be
        substantial. Creating a Grand Wonderwork from scratch is, of course, a Great
        Work project.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Sawing Someone In Half:</strong> Presuming that you’re not
        taking the messy approach, you should enchant your beautiful assistant
        with Self 4 (for high-end shapeshifting), or potentially Self 2 if
        you’re the sort of goofball who would “lend someone a hand”.
      </p>

      <p id="soul_repository">
        <strong>Soul Repository:</strong> To catch a single soul is simple, a
        Craft :: Self 3 ritual using Clergy, Healer, Medium, or Theurge. If
        you’d like to provide a sort of afterlife for them, add Communion 4 or
        Trickery 4 to build a dream realm or hallucination. To build something
        that catches all the souls of the dead within a small valley would be
        Minor :: Self 3, but it would also be affecting a group with
        <a href="#infra">Infrastructure</a> I, adding 2 time steps.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Vehicles:</strong> Sky yachts, auto-chariots, and other
        personal transportation would be minor rituals. Larger airships,
        sandworms, or whalesubs would be major rituals. Either would use
        Industry 2. If they'll be traveling through low-flow areas like space,
        use Industry 3. If they have weaponry, fold in War 2+ as well.
      </p>

      <p>
        <strong>Vending Machines:</strong> At Industry 2, a craft ritual could
        construct a cornucopia that produces one thing a few times a day. A
        minor ritual could create a multi-purpose device, or one that
        continually produces a particular thing.
      </p>


      <aside title="More Ritual Examples">
        <h4 id="more_rituals">More Ritual Examples</h4>
        <p>
          The Magic section also has several examples of ritual arts. We’ve repeated a
          few of them below for reference:
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong>Great Works:</strong> Clone an entire megalopolis (just the
          buildings). Create a group of mystical servitors large enough to qualify for
          Infrastructure I. Ward a group or area the size of Infrastructure I. Create
          the first of a new form of intelligent life.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong> Major Rituals:</strong> Giving the Gift. Warding a village or
          everyone in it. Create a new intelligent being. Build large airships. Clone
          a human being. Create thousands of mystical servitors.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong> Minor Rituals:</strong> Create a few dozen mystical servitors. Ward
          a large group or house. Clone a tree or animal. Switch your immortality from
          one Fount to another.
        </p>
        <p>
          <strong> Craft Rituals:</strong> Baseline for enchantment, healing,
          mnemosurgery, and weatherworking. Ward a small group or a room. Conduct
          soul-work. Conjure large and complex items, or clone small and simple ones.
          Apply Distillation to a building. Create a single mystical servitor.
        </p>
      </aside>

    </section>
  </section>

  <section title="Approaches and Twists" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="approaches_twists">Approaches and Twists</h2>

    <p>
      While magic and Expertise are certainly powerful, they’re only half of
      the game. Twists alter the world around your character, bringing certain
      story elements into play. Twists are spent “through” Approaches to alter
      the story. The more Twists you spend, the greater the effect you can
      achieve. Whereas Natures and Professions have fairly narrow purviews and
      well-defined results, Approaches are broader and take a little more
      interpretation in their use.
    </p>

    <p>
      This section looks at Approaches, Twists, and Complications in depth, to
      give you a better understanding of how they work and how you can exploit
      them to your advantage.
    </p>

    <aside title="PCs Only">
      <h3>PCs Only</h3>
      <p>
        All characters in Sorc have Traditions, Civilizations, Societies,
        Shifts, Expertise, Nature scores, and Core Values. Only player
        characters have Approaches. Not even the most important of GM
        characters has Approaches, or Twists with which to activate them.
        Approaches are the province of player characters.
      </p>
    </aside>

    <h3 id="activating_approaches">Activating Approaches</h3>

    <p>
      Each game session you start with a number of Twists equal to your
      character’s Import, which can be spent through one of their Approaches
      to alter the story. You use them to create Advantages or Complications –
      typically Advantages for yourself or Complications for others, though
      you could certainly give a fellow character an Advantage using your
      Twists. The stronger the effect you want, the more Twists you need to
      spend to create it.
    </p>

    <p>
      To activate a particular Approach, you spend a number of Twists equal to
      the level of the Effect you want to create. If you want a Minor
      Complication, that’s 3 Twists. If you want a Major Advantage, that’s 7
      Twists. See <a href="Rules.xhtml#complications">Complications and
        Advantages</a> for more detail.
    </p>

    <p>
      Your Approach activation has to fit with both the Nature itself and the
      Approach. If you’d like to inflict a major injury on an opponent,
      Communion (Close Friends) is a bad choice. War is a better Nature for
      that, but your descriptor has to allow it: War (Won’t Fall Down) would
      likewise be a bad choice.
    </p>

    <p>
      Approach use should also be believable. Stretching the bounds of
      believability is fine; many stories do that. Running roughshod over
      everyone’s understandings of the game world is just a bad idea. Think of
      Approaches as bending the story around your character, not as a power
      that your character can access. If you use Industry (Megastructures) to
      create a floating mountain, saying “Why don’t we hide in that floating
      mountain over there?” begs the question, “Why didn’t anyone mention this
      massive structure before?” Using it instead to say that the entire
      mountain slides in from some nearby world, now that would raise some
      interesting questions.
    </p>

    <p>
      Once applicability and believability have been established, Approach
      activation beats out all other game mechanics. It doesn’t matter whether
      your character is completely outclassed; Twists win.
    </p>

    <p>
      Effects can touch multiple characters, but not groups large enough to
      warrant the Infrastructure descriptor. You cannot easily create
      <a href="#large_fx">large-scale Effects</a>. Those Effects typically
      require creating a <a href="Rules.xhtml#plots">Plot</a> and following it through.
    </p>

    <h3>Trivial Approach Activations</h3>

    <p>
      Once per scene you can generate a Trivial Complication or Advantage for
      free. For example, if our heroine is known as a famous athlete, with the
      Approach Communion (Loved By All), people will tend to crowd around her
      in public spaces. This costs no Twists – the people who do this are not
      adversely impacted, nor is the character gaining any real advantage.
    </p>

    <p>
      If your GM tells you that you can’t benefit from this (as part of the
      GM’s plot, no doubt), you receive a Twist the first time this happens in
      a game session.
    </p>

    <h3>Taking Complications</h3>

    <p>
      Twists come from several different sources, as described in the
      “<a href="#sources_of_twists">Sources of Twists</a>” sidebar.
      The greatest potential source of Twists
      is from taking Complications. When you do this, you, the player, are
      allowed to describe problems that your character must overcome. You can
      choose any sort of Complication you like. Generally, only rough
      descriptions are necessary. Your GM will fill in the rest.
    </p>

    <p>
      The level of the Complication indicates the maximum number of Twists
      that are available by willingly accepting the listed Complication. If
      your Complication is something you can mitigate by using your magic,
      then you subtract your Power score from the number of Twists you would
      receive (as per the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>. On the other hand, if
      your problems stem from your magic itself and further use would only
      exacerbate things, you keep the full number of Twists (as per the <a href="Rules.xhtml#worst_enemy">Worst
        Enemy rule</a>.
    </p>

    <p>
      If you have a Core Value that aligns with the Complication that you are
      taking, and that CV is rated 3 or higher, you gain an extra Twist from
      that Complication.
    </p>

    <p>
      When you take a Complication, you can spend the associated Twists
      immediately or you can “bank” them for later use any time until the end
      of the current session of play. Choose which Nature you store them in.
    </p>

    <p>
      Players may not hold more than 12 twists at one time. If you are about
      to go over 12 Twists, you may immediately spend some of them before
      gaining your new set of Twists. Individual Natures can store up to 6
      Twists, with additional Twists spilling over into adjacent Natures.
    </p>

    <p>
      The GM, as part of the job of creating a story, will often be placing
      your character into situations similar to Complications. You receive no
      Twists for this. You also do not receive Twists for Complications
      incurred as the result of a conflict. Only Complications you accept of
      your own initiative provide Twists.
    </p>

    <section title="Approach Spot Rules">
      <h3 id="approach_spot">Spot Rules for Twists and Approaches</h3>

      <h4 id="plot_immunity">Plot Immunity</h4>

      <p>
        Spending 5 Twists will allow you to invoke “Plot Immunity” for your character.
        Plot Immunity is a way of saying, “I’m in danger, but I’m going to get out of
        it somehow.” It’s also a way of telling the GM that you’d like this particular
        hazard to be over and done so that you can get back to other parts of the
        game.
      </p>
      <p>
        Plot Immunity must be focused through an Approach, or involve your Natures or
        Professions in some way. Use things that are already established about your
        character to get you out of the mess in some astonishing but inevitable way.
        Plot Immunity works best when your character is off-screen, or has an obvious
        solution to the problem. You might have a problem that could be taken care of
        in other ways, given a little legwork and some trading favors, but Plot
        Immunity will do it right away.
      </p>
      <p>
        If you activate Plot Immunity, your GM cannot face you with the same hazard in
        the same game session. If your character decides to intentionally return to a
        known danger, however, your old use of Plot Immunity will not save your
        character this time.
      </p>

      <h4 id="frying_pan_rule">The Frying Pan Rule</h4>

      <p>
        When dealing with a Complication that you willingly accepted, you cannot spend
        Twists to ameliorate its effects in any way at all.
      </p>
      <p>
        Complications are also explicitly allowed to end the duration on existing
        Approach activations and bring elements removed by Plot Immunity back into
        play.
      </p>
      <p>
        You may, if you wish, avoid Complications that you received as a result of
        Conflicts by spending Twists. Only Complications that you voluntarily took in
        order to get Twists are immune to Approach use.
      </p>

      <h4>No PVP</h4>
      <p>
        You cannot use Approaches to affect other characters directly with a
        Complication. If you create a Major Advantage for yourself that makes you rich
        and then stage a hostile takeover of another PCs company, that’s fine. The
        takeover will happen using the normal Conflict rules, at the character level.
        However, if you try to work at the player level and give the other PC a
        Complication that takes away their company, that’s not allowed. When you
        activate an Approach, you can only affect NPCs with your Complications.
        Creating an Advantage for a fellow PC is acceptable, as long as you have their
        approval.
      </p>

      <h4>Twist vs. Twist</h4>
      <p>
        Once a Twist has been used, it can’t be undone, even by the use of another
        Twist. However, players whose characters have different goals might use
        several Twists to wrest control of the story back and forth, each describing a
        particular event or series of events. They can’t contradict each other, but
        they are allowed to bring in new elements that mitigate the effects of the
        previous Twist.
      </p>

      <h4>Twists and Scope</h4>
      <p>
        Twist use is intended to have a great deal of power. It is also intended to
        have a relatively narrow scope. This means that the resulting Complications
        typically only affect a couple of people, work in the short term, or preserve
        the status quo
      </p>
      <p>
        It is possible to use Twists to impose longer-lasting changes on the game
        world. You can do this by crafting <a href="Rules.xhtml#plots">Plots</a>. This is an excellent
        use for “leftover” Twists at the end of a session, as well as being a good way
        for players to cooperate. Plots are not easy or quick to create, but they have
        the potential to completely alter a campaign.
      </p>

      <h4>Game vs. Story</h4>
      <p>
        Complications have two parts: an impact on the story (e.g. kidnapping, loss of
        income) and a game effect (e.g. losing access to Natures, having your Core
        Value diminished). Who gets to choose what those effects are?
      </p>
      <p>
        During conflict, the player and GM (or occasionally two players) decide on
        both the story effect and the game effect for each other’s characters.
      </p>
      <p>
        When intentionally accepting a Complication to gain Twists, the player may
        describe the story effect on his or her character for that Complication.
        However, the GM chooses the game effect.
      </p>
      <p>
        Sometimes the GM or the inflicting player might choose to waive a game effect,
        deciding that the story impact as described warrants no effect in game terms.
        However, until the Complication is fixed, game effects can always be applied
        if they seem appropriate to the situation. Story effects should not be waived
        – they are the “why” of the Complication, and merely applying penalties to
        character attributes does not provide enough detail or make for an interesting
        enough story.
      </p>

    </section>

    <aside title="Sources of Twists">
      <h3 id="sources_of_twists">Sources of Twists</h3>

      <p>For easy reference, here are the major ways to gain Twists:</p>

      <p>
        <strong>Bad Luck / Worst Enemy:</strong> Invoking these rules provides
        you Twists in a particular Nature, in exchange for a mishap.
        For the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>,
        the number of Twists is equal to the level of
        Complication that ensues, minus your
        Power score, with a minimum of one. For the
        <a href="Rules.xhtml#worst_enemy">Worst Enemy Rule</a>, your
        Power score is not subtracted. The
        <a href="#frying_pan_rule">Frying Pan Rule</a> applies in both cases.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Core Value:</strong> If you have a CV rated at 3 or higher,
        you receive one extra Twist in any Nature each time you suffer a
        Complication related to that CV. GMs are encouraged to interpret
        the word “related” liberally. You do not
        receive this extra Twist for your Self-Preservation CV.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Unconventional Form:</strong> If you have a unconventional
        Earthly Form and suffer because of it, you receive Twists as per
        the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Approach Stymied:</strong> The first time during a gaming
        session that your GM overrules the use of an Approach for a Trivial
        Effect, you gain a Twist for that Nature.</p>
      <p>
        <strong>Because The GM Said So:</strong> Your GM may decide to
        give you Twists at any time, in any Nature, for any reason.</p>
      <p>
        Each Nature holds a maximum of six Twists. If you gain more, they
        must spill over into adjacent Natures or be lost.
      </p>
    </aside>


    <section title="Examples: Taking Complications" class="examples">
      <h3 id="compx">Examples of Taking Complications</h3>

      <p>
        A renegade Hearth-kin is dragged to the nearest home-tree to face a
        stern talking-to by the local elder.
      </p>

      <p>
        Their player says, “Crap, I bet I even know this person. I’m probably
        related to them. I was probably a jerk to them when I was a kid.”
      </p>

      <p>“Do you want to make that into a Complication?” asks the GM.</p>

      <p>
        “Yeah, sure!” says the player. “Just a Minor one? Like, it’s a small
        strike against me, not something they’ll throw me into jail for.”
      </p>

      <p>
        “Sounds good. Meet Grandma Drought. She does not look happy to see
        you.”
      </p>

      <p>
        This falls under the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>. The normal award for a minor
        complication is 3 Twists, but this character has Power 1, so they get
        2 Twists instead.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        The team’s leader has been acting as a communications hub, using
        multiple simultaneous Farspeech connections. They find themselves
        going into a dangerous situation and wanting some extra Twists.
      </p>

      <p>
        Farspeech has emotional burn-in as a potential side effect. The
        leader’s player activates the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>, taking a Moderate
        complication. They state that the leader has been routing too many
        conversations and they’re getting paranoid, likely to treat anyone who
        comes into the situation as an enemy. Moderate Complications are worth
        5 Twists. The leader’s Power is 2, so they get 3 Twists from this.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        In the same example as above, the team’s samaritan would love to come
        in and help the leader. The character doesn’t realize that they’ll be
        attacked on sight because of the leader’s current paranoia. However,
        the player knows, and has some options.
      </p>

      <p>
        Option 1: They could spend some Twists through an Approach like
        Mystery (Danger Sense) to avoid the situation, or Communion
        (Friendship) to avoid triggering the leader’s paranoia.
      </p>

      <p>
        Option 2: They could attempt to use Natures like Trickery or Mystery
        (probably with Spy or Criminal) to stay hidden, helping the leader
        from a distance. This would require a short conflict between the
        samaritan and the leader.
      </p>

      <p>
        Option 3: They could take a Complication to represent an injury: they
        show up to help only to be immediately blasted by the leader.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A Glimmermere resident has been using the Shell Game to adjust the
        aspect of a local ley line. One of the side effects of the Shell Game
        is chaotic flow. The artist’s player decides that traces of the many
        different aspects the artist handled stick with them, causing
        difficulty in spellcasting and resulting in a number of wild effects
        any time they use an Art.
      </p>

      <p>
        The player selects a Major Complication: high impact and long-lasting.
        Because this sort of complication can’t be addressed by the character
        themselves and their use of magic, it’s governed by the Worst Enemy
        rule rather than the <a href="Rules.xhtml#bad_luck">Bad Luck Rule</a>. They get the full 7 Twists
        regardless of their Power score – which is good, because they’re gonna
        need some help.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        The GM has created a minor antagonist that’s unexpectedly popular with
        the players. The team loves to hate them. One of the players takes a
        Major Complication to ensure that the antagonist constantly has
        information on where they’re going to be and what their plans are.
        Another one takes a Moderate Complication stating that the antagonist
        is secretly in love with their character, which could certainly cause
        trouble. The GM crosses out “lackey” on the NPC’s character sheet and
        replaces it with “nemesis”.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        The player of a Hearth-kin defender wants to take a Moderate
        complication for a broken arm at the end of a fight, and then use
        regeneration (without spending any Reserve) to heal that break before
        anything else happens. The GM denies this Complication under the Big
        Deal rule: if your Complication doesn’t affect you, it’s not a
        Complication.
      </p>
    </section>

    <section title="Examples: Twist Use" class="examples">
      <h3 id="twistx">Examples of Twist Use</h3>

      <p>
        A Sovereign warlord (played by the GM) activates the Ten-Crore Stones
        of Death, vaporizing the area where an Ægis Shieldbearer (a player
        character) was attempting to hide from them. This triggers the
        <a href="#oidcr">Obligatory Instant Death Cutscene Rule</a>, giving the player a
        chance to spend Twists. The player spends three Twists through the
        Shieldbearer’s Trickery (Right Behind You) Approach, selecting an
        “escaped but not without injury” advantage. The Shieldbearer activates
        a risky, painful teleportation art, evading the Ten-Crore Stones’
        effect, and closing in to engage the Sovereign in hand-to-hand combat.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A dream-pathogen sweeps through the city, infecting the team and
        threatening to put everyone into an eternal sleep. Most of them have
        enough Self to shrug it off, but their Returner sidekick is in
        trouble.
      </p>

      <p>
        Their player would like to activate <a href="#plot_immunity">Plot Immunity</a>.
        Their Approach for the Mystery-nature is “Genius Through Stupidity”.
        The player declares that the disease relies on a mystical experience
        of the world that their Returner simply doesn’t have. It passes over
        them harmlessly.
      </p>

      <p>
        This would cost 5 Twists from Mystery or an adjacent Nature. Right now
        they’ve got 3 in Mystery and 1 in Trickery, so they need 1 more. With
        Power 0, they can take a Trivial Complication to get the Twist.
        (assuming they haven’t done so yet this session). The Returner yawns
        and stretches and then looks around confused as everyone else on the
        street falls down.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        A Geometer loiters outside their club’s headquarters, trying to
        overhear the plans for an upcoming social event. They could spend
        Twists through an Approach like Mystery (Eavesdropper) or Mystery
        (Silent Observer). How big of an effect they need to create depends on
        exactly what they want to achieve. If they want to know the current
        plans and take their chances that they might change, that’s a moderate
        advantage – accurate information, short-term. If the player wants to
        lock in those plans so they don’t change, they could spend a Shift to
        bump it up to a major advantage for long-term information.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>How might you use Twists to stop a massive volcanic eruption?</p>

      <p>
        If there’s no one in danger, it’s probably a Minor Advantage. It might
        feel strange to say there’s no real impact when a mountain explodes,
        but volcanoes erupt every day without being an important part of
        anyone’s story.
      </p>

      <p>
        Plot Immunity could save your character (and probably a few others
        nearby), but it wouldn’t stop the lava.
      </p>

      <p>
        If you need to buy time for locals to evacuate, that’s Moderate,
        granting you a short-term Advantage with key information. Of course,
        if the eruption is happening right now, you might not get enough time
        from that.
      </p>

      <p>
        If you intend to save a village with a massive, flamboyant magical
        effect (e.g. transmuting everyone inside it to a fire elemental,
        freezing the lava solid, etc.), that’s a Major advantage. It’s high
        impact and long-lasting.
      </p>

      <p>
        Regardless of what level of Advantage is required, you’ll need an
        appropriate Approach. Good examples include Mystery (Prediction), War
        (Violence Turned Back), Industry (Instant Construction), Industry
        (Invulnerability), Mystery (Elemental Savant), and many others.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        An Ægis shieldbearer wants to comfort a crying child, but they’re an
        enormous, armored, photon-winged, gold-clawed bringer of death. That’s
        a bit of a barrier. However, the shieldbearer has Communion (Trusting
        Shoulder) and a few Twists to spend. The GM rules that this is not a
        major story point, and the shieldbearer can comfort the child and win
        the trust of their family with a Minor effect.
      </p>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section title="Plots" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="plots">Plots</h2>

    <p>
      Plots are an extension of normal Approach use. They are a way to spend
      Twists, sometimes dozens of them, over a long period of time, in order
      to create significant changes in the game world.
    </p>

    <p>
      In order to create a Plot, all three of the following criteria must be
      met:
    </p>

    <p>
      The events and resolution of the Plot must be related to one or more of
      your character’s Approaches.
    </p>

    <p>
      At least one of your character’s Core Values must be related to the
      Plot. Ideally, that CV would be either reaffirmed or eroded by the
      completion of the Plot.
    </p>

    <p>
      Your character must somehow be involved. This may be directly (as an
      instigator), indirectly (through support), or even as a bystander swept
      up in the events. You cannot merely benefit from the Plot, you must be
      there for it.
    </p>

    <p>
      If those criteria are met, you may spend Twists over the course of
      multiple game sessions in order to create a Complication or Advantage
      from the <a href="Rules.xhtml#large_fx">Large-Scale Effects</a> list.
    </p>

    <p>
      You can spend Twists at any time to add to add to the Plot’s total. You
      should keep a running tally of the number of points spent. Each time,
      note which Approach and which Core Value are involved, as well as the
      number of Twists spent. This will help to shape the path of the Plot,
      which is evolving behind the scenes as the game progresses.
    </p>

    <p>
      Multiple characters may spend Twists to speed a Plot to its resolution.
      One character will be the “lead” for a particular Plot during each
      session, and is allowed to spend as many Twists as he or she desires.
      Other players who are involved must still have their characters meet the
      criteria, but may only spend one Twist each per session.
    </p>

    <p>
      The desired resolution of a Plot must be described from the beginning.
      Changing the course of a Plot is possible, but the Plot will lose half
      of the Twists currently invested in it.
    </p>

    <h3>GM Action on Plots</h3>

    <p>
      GMs can add Twists to existing Plots as well. Each time the players
      willingly take a Complication, you can choose to give that player an
      extra Twist, and also add a Twist to a particular Plot. The Complication
      doesn’t need to be directly related to the Plot at hand, but the
      character must be somehow involved.
    </p>

    <h3>The Plot Veto</h3>

    <p>
      Ordinary Twist expenditures are not subject to GM approval. Unless the
      group considers your Effect to be completely outside the realm of
      believability, Twists are the most effective and powerful tools in the
      game.
    </p>

    <p>
      This works partly because most Effects are of short duration. They are
      fairly personal, and almost never have consequences beyond the end of
      the current game session. Large-scale effects, on the other hand, can
      affect thousands or even millions of people for the rest of their lives,
      and can change the landscape of the game.
    </p>

    <p>
      The GM’s job in Sorcerously Advanced is to create a storyline for the
      players in which their characters can be involved, and which is
      entertaining for all. In general we find that most player-level Plots
      don’t interfere with the game’s main storyline. These stories can
      coexist peacefully, metaphorically speaking.
    </p>

    <p>
      However, there may come a time when a player’s Plot runs directly
      counter to the story that the GM is attempting to tell. For instance,
      the GM may have the Fellowship of Truth as a major villain in the game,
      and desire to use them as an organization many times until the players’
      characters finally defeat them. One of the players, whether aware of
      this storyline or not, might want to destroy the Fellowship using a
      Plot. This would shortcut much of the GM’s planning and hard work. Such
      things can be frustrating for the GM and lead to a game in which the GM
      is not as well-prepared and the party doesn’t have as much fun.
    </p>

    <p>
      There may also be times when a Plot would weaken or cheapen the GM’s
      story, or the GM’s planned story would do the same to a player’s Plot.
    </p>

    <p>
      In such situations, the GM can veto a Plot, or ask that it be delayed
      until after a certain event. This veto power should be used immediately
      when the Plot is created, and any Twists spent on the Plot should be
      refunded.
    </p>

    <p>
      We recommend that this veto be used as rarely as possible. Sorc is a
      game with significant GM authority, but the players should also be given
      as much agency as the game will allow. Such Plots might even lead to a
      burst of inspiration and creativity for the GM that improves the game!
      Sometimes it’s worth trying to figure out how both stories can occur.
      Negotiating a possible compromise is a much better option than a
      flat-out veto.
    </p>

    <h3>GM Plot Seeds</h3>

    <p>
      Plots can also be a great way for the GM to tell the players where the
      game is going, and invite them to pace the sessions. Players can then
      direct the game towards things in which they are interested, and the GM
      will know what plots the players are interested in pursuing.
    </p>

    <p>
      This is as easy as writing up a sheet of paper with a set of “Plot
      Seeds”. Each one has an end goal and a Twist amount that would be
      required to reach it. For instance, one might say “Root out corruption
      in the Guild leadership,” with a cost of 20 Twists. As players spend
      more Twists on that, the GM introduces elements of that particular plot.
      If no players are interested in pursuing that Plot, it will remain
      untouched and the GM will know to focus effort elsewhere.
    </p>

    <p>
      Plot Seeds are an optional item, and even if you use them, not every
      storyline the GM wants to pursue needs to be a Plot Seed (or two or
      three).
    </p>

    <p>
      The GM can still introduce stories normally. Plot Seeds are more like an
      official feedback channel between the GM and players that helps both
      sides influence the flow of the game.
    </p>

    <section title="Examples: Plots" class="examples">
      <h3 id="plotx">Example Plots</h3>

      <h4>Corruption in the Archive</h4>

      <p>
        You’re a cynical player, and you don’t believe that the Archive could
        be on the level. There must be something sinister going on behind the
        scenes.
      </p>

      <p>
        You create a Plot that will end with a Moderate Complication for the
        Archive, publicly revealing the corruption of a highly-ranked
        Archivist. The Archive is a Society with Infrastructure II. This Plot
        will cost 5 for the Moderate Complication, times 3 for Infrastructure
        II: 15 Twists. The GM approves the Plot, and quietly notes a few of
        the NPCs the players know who might be in on the conspiracy.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <h4>The Second Death</h4>

      <p>
        You are the GM. In your game, there’s a flaw in the Great Enchantment
        of the Cult of the Empty Grave. If it’s not fixed, ghosts affected by
        the Great Enchantment will die of old age. This will cause panic in
        the Cult, as it splinters into smaller organizations, some pressing on
        without their ancestors, others working to constantly restore them.
      </p>

      <p>
        You put this on the table as follows: “Critical Complication: the
        Cult’s ghosts can die of old age.” You don’t need to describe any of
        the repercussions of this event. The players can then choose whether
        to enable this event to pass, assuming their characters meet the
        criteria: it’s related to one of their Approaches, it’s related to one
        of their Core Values, and they’re directly involved in discovering
        this or being impacted by it. As the GM, you can also add a Twist to
        this Plot when characters who are involved with it take a voluntary
        Complication.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <h4>Farewell to Fellowship</h4>

      <p>
        You’re sick of the Fellowship of Truth. Just so completely fed up with
        everything about them. You decide to remove them from the game world.
      </p>

      <p>
        You declare that the majority of the Fellowship is going to try to tap
        directly into Aion for power and be vaporized in the process. That’s a
        Critical Complication for 9 Twists, times 3 for an Infrastructure II
        group like the Fellowship, for a total of 27 Twists. There may be a
        handful of Fellowship members still alive afterward, but for all
        intents and purposes the group will be gone.
      </p>

      <p>
        As a card-carrying Archivist, your “Knowledge for the Sake of the
        World” CV ties in well here. You also have a Self (Strong Soul)
        Approach that gives you an idea: You request that the GM make you a
        bystander in their attempts, perhaps hoping to sacrifice you to power
        their magic. The GM was planning on having a big confrontation between
        your group and the Fellowship, but honestly having their own hubris
        destroy them sounds just fine, so they approve the Plot. You save up
        some Twists so you can get kidnapped and watch the fireworks.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <h4>Diadem Declares War</h4>

      <p>
        You’re playing a Diadem merchant. The GM has a side plot wherein your
        character’s newborn grandchild has been kidnapped by the Unroyal.
        Rather than run off to handle this yourself, you decide to create a
        Plot instead: you’re going to call in favors, drum up support, and
        convince Diadem to officially declare war on the Unroyal.
      </p>

      <p>
        Your character has Communion (Bonds of Love) and a Might Makes Right
        CV. Their status as a close relative of the kidnapping victim
        definitely qualifies them as “somehow involved”. All three criteria
        are met. The GM agrees and approves the Plot.
      </p>

      <p>
        You call this a Minor Complication for the Unroyal, stating that they
        would rather punish the kidnapper than avoid war. A Minor Complication
        is 3 Twists, times 4 for an Infrastructure III group like the Unroyal.
        The total cost is 12 Twists.
      </p>

      <p>
        You can contribute as many Twists per session as you like. Other
        players whose characters meet the criteria may contribute one Twist
        per session if they like.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        You’d like your character the become the mayor of a city, to set up
        some future stories. The GM suggests that this should be
        personal-level Twist use rather than a Plot, since it doesn’t
        necessarily change the city all that much.
      </p>

      <hr class="divider" />

      <p>
        You like the idea of the Basement Lines, and want to make a Plot that
        says the Groundbreakers are successful in their search for them. The
        GM asks you what you want as ramifications for this plot. The two of
        you brainstorm, and you catch on to the idea of the Groundbreakers
        becoming a full civilization and a major rival to Those Above. Adding
        a full level of Infrastructure to a group is definitely a Critical
        Advantage, totaling 27 Twists. You’re eager to get started, but the GM
        points out that you don’t meet the criteria yet – your character has
        nothing to do with either the Groundbreakers or Those Above. They
        suggest that you look for places where Becoming or some
        individual-level Twist use could tie you into one of those groups.
      </p>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section title="Existentialism" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="exist">Existentialism</h2>

    <p>
      Because life can get complicated for your characters, there are certain
      rules regarding what does and doesn’t count as “your character”. You may
      end up getting cursed to sleep forever, incinerated and resurrected,
      replaced with a mirror-universe duplicate, and worse. When does that
      remove your ability to play your character?
    </p>

    <h4>Don’t Skip This Section</h4>
    <p>
      This section answers key questions about sweeping magical changes to your
      character, and the limits of what you can do with your character. If you’re
      playing a hard, fun, high-magic game with dangerous events, you will run into
      questions like “How much can I shapeshift my own brain before I’m no longer
      actually me?”
    </p>
    <p>
      The title of this section might remind you more of philosophy than sorcery.
      That’s ok. These are philosophical questions. If you don’t like the answers,
      you can change them. The Advice chapter will
      <a href="Advice.xhtml#existentialism_changes">tell you how</a>.
    </p>

    <h3>The Rule of Intent</h3>

    <p>
      If something happens to your character as an intentional result of your
      character’s actions, you control the resulting character. If you curse
      yourself, shapeshift, have a frontal lobotomy, or even kill yourself so
      you can be resurrected later, you still play the resulting character
      even if one could argue that it “isn’t still you”. The guiding principle
      at work is that characters are defined by their choices.
    </p>

    <h3>The Rule of Force</h3>

    <p>
      In the case of drastic changes to your character that your character
      would have opposed, knowing the outcome, you or the GM may decide that
      you no longer control the resulting character. If you get forcibly
      shapeshifted, cursed, brainwashed, etc. into something your old
      character wouldn’t have agreed with, the default is that it’s time to
      pick up a new character. The old one is now an NPC. You and the GM can
      talk about it if you still want to play the resulting character. If
      either one of you says “no,” then it’s time to make a new one.
    </p>

    <h3>The Rule of Identity</h3>

    <p>
      All versions and instances of your character are still yours to control
      unless the Rule of Force comes into play. If you intentionally make 100
      clones of yourself, you have authority over all of them. If someone made
      a clone of you without your knowledge, things would depends on whether
      your character would appreciate that or not, as per the Rule of Force.
    </p>

    <h3>The Rule of Reversals</h3>

    <p>
      If the drastic changes mentioned in the Rule of Force are substantially
      reversed, you may, at your option, regain control of your character.
    </p>

    <h3>The Rule of Ontological Inertia</h3>

    <p>
      If a character leaves play, permanently or temporarily, the player can
      still activate Approaches from the character until the player receives a
      new character or the old one returns to play. This primarily applies to
      dead or unconscious characters, but can also apply to people who are
      stuck in the Red Space or trapped in unbreakable crystal. Such
      characters are unlikely to garner Twists except at the beginning of a
      session, so playing a permanently dead character rather limits one’s
      options.
    </p>

    <h3>The Guideline of Equal Play</h3>

    <p>
      One item that didn’t quite make it to “rule” status is the Guideline of
      Equal Play. In Sorc there are many ways to multiply the effectiveness of
      a character. If the party splits, creating a mirror-duplicate may allow
      certain characters to follow both groups at once, or even split into
      multiple parties all by themselves. However, due to the need to share
      play time with other players, a player who has split their character
      should expect that some actions will be glossed over. A 100-body one-man
      police force is great, but its player won’t be roleplaying each of them
      individually.
    </p>
  </section>

  <section title="Infrastructure" class="chapter" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 id="infra">Infrastructure</h2>

    <p>
      The rules of Sorcerously Advanced are intended for human-scale
      characters and conflicts, but they can also handle events on the scale
      of cities, societies, or even nations. Because of their interconnected
      nature and need for support, Sorc denotes these groups with the
      Infrastructure descriptor, which has three levels:
    </p>

    <ol type="I">
      <li>
        Armadas, cities, thousands of people working together or tens of
        thousands with weak interconnection.
      </li>
      <li>
        Societies, provinces and nations, armies, millions of people working
        together or tens of millions with weak interconnection.
      </li>
      <li>
        Civilizations: multiple nations working together on one or many
        continents.
      </li>
    </ol>

    <p>
      The Infrastructure descriptor is a particularly important one, as it has
      substantial game effects. These are collected below for easy reference.
    </p>

    <h3>Large-scale Characters</h3>

    <p>
      Characters built with the Infrastructure descriptor (such as automata
      swarms, living skyships, or a horde of mirror duplicates) increase their
      Power score by 1 in every Tradition. This has the usual side-effect of
      reducing their Import by 1.
    </p>

    <p>
      You cannot play a character with more than one level of Infrastructure.
      Nature scores are still capped at level 5.
    </p>

    <h3>Cross-Level Conflicts</h3>

    <p>
      In a conflict between groups with differing levels of Infrastructure,
      the larger group applies the maximum Teamwork bonus for the type of
      conflict involved: +4 for most conflicts, +6 for highly parallel ones
      (see <a href="#teamwork_conflict">Teamwork in Conflicts</a>).
    </p>

    <p>
      If the larger group would suffer a Complication, the level of that
      Complication is reduced by one step for each level of Infrastructure. If
      the smaller group also has Infrastructure, use the difference in levels
      to find the reduction. This reduction also applies to any Advantage the
      smaller party might try to gain.
    </p>

    <h3>Rituals for Large Groups</h3>

    <p>
      Rituals can affect groups with Infrastructure. Infrastructure I adds 2
      time steps, II adds 4 time steps, and III adds 6 time steps. You may
      also need a successful large-scale Conflict to pull off the project, as
      most large groups are well-defended.
    </p>

    <p>
      If you yourself have the Infrastructure descriptor, treat this as a +4
      Teamwork modifier in Rituals.
    </p>

    <p>
      As the Great Basin is particularly immense, and some magical workings
      are known to affect the entirety of it (and beyond), there are three
      “virtual infrastructure” levels that represent affecting entire worlds
      with a magical working:
    </p>

    <ol type="I" start="4" id="virtual_infrastructure">
      <li>
        Magical works that affect multiple civilizations at once. +8 time
        steps
      </li>
      <li>
        Complex and vast rituals that change the nature of the entire Basin.
        +10 time steps
      </li>
      <li>
        Sorcerous superstructures that touch upon all worlds in the
        Kaleidoscope and beyond. +12 time shifts
      </li>
    </ol>

    <p>
      There are no actual groups that possess this level of infrastructure.
      These levels only exist for the purpose of truly vast magical efforts
      like building the Travel Lattice.
    </p>

    <h3>Approaches with a Cast of Thousands</h3>

    <p>
      Groups with Infrastructure cost more to affect with Approach use. See
      below for the exact numbers. Because of the 12-Twist cap, ordinary
      Approach use typically cannot affect large groups, and you will need to
      use Plots instead.
    </p>

    <p>
      Self-affecting Twist use (such as Plot Immunity) is not more expensive
      for characters with Infrastructure.
    </p>

    <h3>Nature Scores for Large Groups</h3>

    <p>
      Sorcerously Advanced uses Nature scores to describe the personal prowess
      of individual characters. We also use a similar set of Natures to
      describe the strengths and weaknesses of large organizations.
    </p>

    <p>
      Organizations and characters with Infrastructure I still have the usual
      six Nature scores. Above that, things change a bit.
    </p>

    <p>
      For groups with Infrastructure II or III, the Inudstry-nature is less
      about creating larger or more powerful things, and more about trade,
      resources, and flow. The Self of a large organization speaks to its
      internal cohesion, its resilience, and the way it knows and stands by
      its Core Values. It also protects the bodies and minds of its citizens.
      War is perhaps the least-changed Nature, still representing destructive
      power and strategic acumen.
    </p>

    <p>
      However, organizations with Infrastructure II or III no longer have
      Mystery, Communion, and Trickery ratings. Instead, we describe them in
      terms of <strong>Statecraft</strong>, <strong>Tradecraft</strong>, and
      <strong>Research</strong>.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Statecraft</strong> is diplomacy, effective foreign policy, and
      the ability to make advantageous treaties with other large
      organizations. People who contribute to a group’s Statecraft rating
      usually employ a combination of Communion and Trickery, though they may
      lean toward one or the other.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Tradecraft</strong> is spy-work, espionage, and generally
      collecting “intelligence” on one’s rivals. On the micro level it is
      accomplished through Trickery, Mystery, or a combination of the two.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Research</strong> moves the arts of sorcery forward, pushing
      toward the day when magic becomes technology. Groups with many
      high-Mystery individuals tend to lean on them; others use Communion to
      build research alliances and share knowledge.
    </p>

    <p>
      The Nature scores of an Infrastructure II or III organization have no
      bearing on the attributes of individuals. They’re good estimates for
      average citizen Nature scores, but some people will have much higher or
      lower scores.
    </p>

    <h3>Infrastructure-level Magic</h3>

    <p>
      So what does it mean when a city has a high Industry rating? What does a
      country’s Tradecraft represent? Here’s a broad overview of what each
      Nature accomplishes at the large scale.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Industry:</strong> More durable civic structures. Improved
      weather. Better logistics. Better-tasting food. A more mobile populace
      with faster transit. Clean and well-conditioned flow. Restrictions on
      the use of Travel. The chronal terraforming of the Worldbuilders.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Research:</strong> More magic use in everyday life. Outposts in
      the Worlds Beyond and the Dream Realms, or even the empty space beyond
      the Basin. Influential research institutions. A wider variety of Arts,
      some of which have been expanded or enhanced.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Self:</strong> Well-supported healers and respected therapists.
      Education that teaches more effectively. The ability to settle harsh
      environments. The ability to slowly change Core Values or their ratings.
      The creation of the Golden Ægis’ Overmind.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Statecraft:</strong> Subtle enhancements of charisma and
      persuasiveness. Carefully crafted laws. Improved civic planning.
      Precognitive examination of how alliances will unfold. More treaties and
      fewer wars.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Tradecraft:</strong> Farspeech networks. Secret partnerships
      with spirit courts. A populace that reports suspicious events to the
      authorities. More broken treaties.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>War:</strong> Faster responses to incursions. Better-armed
      militaries. The Threefold Gates of Retribution that protect large
      settlements from outside magical assault. Influential generals. More
      wars.
    </p>

    <h3 id="large_fx">Large-Scale Effects</h3>

    <p>
      Just as individual characters can suffer Complications, so too can
      cities, societies, or entire civilizations. When two large groups face
      off against each other, or when the <a href="Rules.xhtml#plots">Plot</a>
      system is in use, use this set of Effects.
    </p>

    <p>
      For the most part, a civilization-level conflict plays out like a
      character-level conflict. However, the Effects listed for regular human
      beings are not quite appropriate for large groups with infrastructure.
    </p>

    <p>
      As with individual-level Effects, the numbers in parentheses are used to
      rate the severity of the Complication or Advantage. The slashes separate
      costs for groups of Infrastructure I, II, or III. If you prefer a
      formula, start with the Twist cost for an ordinary Complication and
      multiply by the level of Infrastructure for that group plus one. For
      instance, creating a Minor (3) leak of classified information from a
      Society (typically Infrastructure II) would cost 3 x (2+1) = 9 Twists.
    </p>

    <p>
      Because of the sheer number of Twists required, and the 12-Twist cap for
      individual characters, it is typically impossible to buy this kind of
      Effect with a one-time Twist expenditure. Instead, use the
      <a href="#plots">Plot rules</a>
      to generate long-term changes in the game world.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Trivial (2/3/4):</strong> Trivial Complications involve
      immediate and minor impact. Government officials annoyed or distracted.
      Lose track of a single being who is not being actively followed. A
      civ-wide CV is challenged publicly. Minor ley line fracture. A handful
      of casualties.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Minor (6/9/12):</strong> Minor Complications are short- term,
      low-impact, and involve skeletal information. They can be annoying if
      not addressed (or if several build up), but they are unlikely to be a
      problem in the short term. An opposing group successfully disengages
      from a long-term conflict, though not without losses. Slightly delayed
      in your plans. Hundreds or thousands of casualties. Government officials
      likely refer to this event as a “national tragedy”. Classified
      information is revealed to a group currently neutral to you. Minor but
      noticeable monetary loss.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Moderate (10/15/20):</strong> Moderate Complications are
      long-term or high-impact, but not both. A single high-level political
      campaign is decided in a particular direction. Major classified
      information revealed to the enemy. Tens of thousands of casualties. Lose
      control of a town. Join an unwise alliance. An agency’s plans are
      significantly delayed. Substantial economic losses or market crash.
      Opposing group disengages conflict without significant harm.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Major (14/21/28):</strong> Major Complications are both
      long-term and high-impact. Complications at this level can remove a
      level of the Infrastructure descriptor. Intelligence services return
      significant incorrect results. Citizens convinced of a particular fact
      or falsehood. Millions of casualties. Important state secrets revealed
      to the enemy. Lose control of a major city. Martial law declared or
      revoked for a substantial part of the populace. Other groups turn
      against you, though not your closest allies. A Society rejects the
      entire civilization. Government ignores wisdom from its advisors. A Core
      Value is reinterpreted.
    </p>

    <p>
      <strong>Critical (18/27/36):</strong> Collapse of the civilization or
      worse. Complications at this level may bring the Rule of Force into
      play. Over half of the population brainwashed, dying, or near death. A
      Core Value is removed or changed. Government living in exile. The
      group’s peoples are driven from their homelands. Economy, military, or
      intelligence agencies fall completely under external controls. Allies
      turned against you. Long-term plans ruined. This condition does not fade
      quickly or easily.
    </p>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
