<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html
  xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
  xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
  xml:lang="en"
  lang="en"
>
  <head>
    <title>Sorcerously Advanced</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
  </head>

  <body>
    <section xml:lang="en" title="Sorcerously Advanced" epub:type="titlepage">
      <h1 id="title_page" class="book_title">Sorcerously Advanced</h1>
      <p> </p>
      <ul class="credits">
        <li><strong>Writing and Layout:</strong> Colin Fredericks</li>
        <li>
          <strong>Artwork:</strong> Full-color artwork by Tithi Luadthong, aka
          GrandFailure <br />
          Icons from Game-Icons.net, licensed CC-BY as enumerated in the
          <a href="EndNotes.xhtml#licensing">endnotes</a>.
          <br />
          Globular Cluster M10 courtesy of NASA.
        </li>
        <li><strong>Proofreader:</strong> Kate Tapley</li>
        <li><strong>Sensitivity Reader:</strong> DT 'Honey' Saint</li>
        <li><strong>Release:</strong> simple-images: 23 March 2021</li>
        <li>
          Sorcerously Advanced uses the fonts Garamond No. 8, Breamcatcher, Type
          Embellishments One, and Mistral. It was created in Affinity Publisher
          on a Macintosh.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        This game’s official support site is:
        <a href="http://suffadv.wikidot.com/">http://suffadv.wikidot.com/</a>
      </p>
    </section>

    <section class="singularity" xml:lang="en" title="The Singularity" epub:type="prologue">
      <h1 id="singularity">The Singularity</h1>
      <p>In the beginning was the Great God Aion.</p>
      <p>
        Aion took of its hands and made a bowl, and this bowl is the world.<br />
        Aion took its eye and made the sun.<br />
        Aion took its hearts and made the moons. <br />
        Aion's every wish becomes a star.
      </p>
      <p>
        Aion gave life to its thoughts, and these are the Worlds Beyond and the
        gods who dwell there.Aionve life to its hopes and fears, and these are
        the people of the world.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>Aion gave life to its dreams, and this was the Gift.</strong>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>
