<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">

<head>
  <title>Worlds</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/epub.css" />
</head>

<body>
  <section class="chapter" title="Worlds" epub:type="part" >
    <h1 id="worlds"  class="title">Worlds</h1>

    <p>
      The setting of Sorcerously Advanced starts with the civilizations of the Great
      Basin, but it extends far beyond them. This chapter details not only the
      physical geography of the Basin, but the mirror-worlds of the Kaleidoscope and
      the more metaphysical realities of the Dream Realms and the Worlds Beyond.
    </p>
    <p>
      This chapter gives a broad overview of each region, describes how it works,
      and picks out a few specific places of interest.
    </p>

    <section class="chapter" title="Cosmology" epub:type="chapter" >
      <h2 id="Cosmology" >Cosmology</h2>
      <p>
        The center of all things is Aion, whose names are Eternity and Epoch and The
        Turning Of Ages – Aion the Unalterable, the Great God whose life is the
        universe.
      </p>
      <p>
        In the world where humanity lives, which we call the Great Basin, Aion is a
        human figure, gold and androgynous, so tremendous that the million-koss-wide
        Great Basin sits comfortably in two of Aion’s many hands.
      </p>
      <p>
        This world is one of many, collectively called the Kaleidoscope. Each world
        has its own lands and seas, its own Aion, its own sentient peoples who
        resemble their creator.
      </p>
      <p>
        If the Kaleidoscope is the universe of matter, the Worlds Beyond are a
        universe of thought and energy. Each one has its own patterns, its own gods,
        and its own people, but they also act as afterlives for the people of the
        Kaleidoscope.
      </p>
      <p>
        Dream Realms too are worlds of thoughts, but they are the fleeting and
        changeable thoughts of people, not the weighty and substantive thoughts of
        Aion. While the Worlds Beyond exist outside of the Kaleidoscope, the Dream
        Realms exist within and between living, thinking beings. They are ever-present
        and ever-changing.
      </p>
      <p>
        All these worlds are not separated by distances that one can walk – or fly. If
        the nearest world in the Kaleidoscope is within the Great Basin’s universe, it
        is so distant that it cannot be seen. One moves between worlds using magic or
        not at all. In the Worlds Beyond, some realms sit side by side, and one can
        indeed walk from one dimension to another, but this is not the rule.
      </p>
      <p>
        There are oddities, too. Where is the Red Space located? Is the Transit
        Lattice one of the Worlds Beyond? Even those who study cosmology have, thus
        far, found no answers to these questions.
      </p>

      <aside title="Flow in Other Worlds">
        <h3 id="kaleidoflow">Flow in Other Worlds</h3>

        <p>
          The Kaleidoscope and the Worlds Beyond produce flow, usually at the same
          rate as the Basin.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Dream Worlds exist within and between the minds of the living. They
          produce flow, but that flow is always aspected with the character of the
          world. A nightmare-realm would produce terror-aspected flow, while one more
          contemplative might produce flow with a puzzle-aspect or a planning-aspect.
        </p>
        <p>
          The <a href="Magic.xhtml#Travel">Travel Lattice</a> is a -1 Null Zone. Flow does not enter the
          Lattice directly, but instead continuously leaks into it through a vast
          number of access points.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Red Space extinguishes flow at a prodigious rate and produces none of
          its own.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <aside title="People, Outlanders, and Gods">
        <h3 id="outlander">People, Outlanders, and Gods</h3>

        <p>
          When we talk about “people” in this chapter, we mean anyone with sapience
          and volition. Any inhabitant of the Kaleidoscope is a “person”, whether they
          are human or sentient tree or Ixitxachitl.
        </p>
        <p>
          When we use the term “outlander”, we mean someone from beyond the
          Kaleidoscope – typically a denizen of the
          <a href="#worlds_beyond">Worlds Beyond</a>.
          Outlanders are sapient but have constrained volition.
        </p>
        <p>
          When we use the term “god”, we mean a part of the world – any world – that
          is a sentient responsive process. Gods have little to no volition. They can
          rarely act in ways contrary to their nature. If they do, they lose much
          power and are sometimes replaced. They are often unaware of this. Most gods
          of the Basin sleep until people interact with them, after which they might
          or might not remain awake for a time. The gods of the Worlds Beyond are more
          active, and are the focal points of their worlds.
        </p>
      </aside>
    </section>
    <section class="chapter" title="The Great Basin" epub:type="chapter" >
      <h2 id="great_basin" >The Great Basin</h2>
      <p>
        Most of this game takes place in The Great Basin, a dish-shaped world of earth
        and water that is humanity's home. The Basin is a million koss in width, which
        makes its surface area over 15,000 times that of the planet Earth.
      </p>
      <p>
        In the perfect center of the Great Basin is the Hub, a mountain range where
        the weather is serene and the flow is smooth like calm waters. This is the
        First Continent, where humanity is presumed to have originated billions of
        years ago, before they spread out into the world.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Basin has all manner of terrain, both mundane and supernatural. There are
        forests, swamps, mountains, plains, and jungles. There are oceans and islands,
        volcanoes and waterfalls. There is more ocean than land, but not by much.
        Nearly every continent is inhabited.
      </p>
      <p>
        Regions of hot and cold are well-separated, but rely more on the presence of
        elemental wellsprings than on the incidence angle of light. Beneath the world,
        gemstones, veins of metal, and volcanic materials are slowly but constantly
        being generated and returned to nothingness, just as the flow passes through
        the air in ley lines.
      </p>
      <p>
        As one moves outward toward the Rim, more fantastic terrain becomes more
        common, as the ley lines carry great rivers of aspected flow through the
        world. There are fields of crystalline extrusions, mile-deep crevasses,
        sparking towers of bronze and glass, forests of color, hills of iron, and
        clouds solid enough to live on. Null Zones likewise become more common, and
        the rule is “feast or famine” – lands are either flooded with strongly
        aspected flow, or nearly devoid of it.
      </p>
      <p>
        The civilizations described in the previous chapter are located about halfway
        between Rim and Hub. They stretch for perhaps seventy thousand koss in either
        direction, covering a mere speck in the Basin’s vastness.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Basin's atmosphere extends upwards for about a thousand koss until it
        thins out. There above the world one can see the calm flow of
        mountain-shattering power in the Attic Lines, ley lines driven upward and out
        of a chaotic atmosphere, into a void where they could flow quiet and safe.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Basin has one sun and several moons. Eclipses of the sun are not one
        passing before the other, but the Eye of Aion rotating to face the world and
        peer at its surface. Eclipses of the moons are moments of great magical
        potential, where the element of the Void is temporarily ascendant.
      </p>
      <p>
        Beyond the Basin is airless space. This void stretches for as far as anyone
        has ever investigated. It is nearly empty (save of course for the body of
        Aion), but it is also so vast that there are still a myriad of unusual things
        to be found floating in its depths, most of them relics of previous
        civilizations.
      </p>
      <h3 id="places_of_interest">Places of Interest</h3>
      <p>
        When deciding where to send your intrepid Archivists next, you may want to
        consider the following locales:
      </p>
      <h4>The Black Sand Desert</h4>
      <p>
        One of the best-studied supernatural locations in the Basin, the Black Sand
        Desert is a stronghold for the Cult of the Empty Grave and was once the center
        of a massive, continents-spanning empire.
      </p>
      <p>
        Ancient homes carved into cliffs ring the desert. In its depths, broken
        buildings lie half-buried in sand. The death-aspected sand pulls in light, and
        travelers must bring light sources with them. Instead of cacti, dead trees
        like bleached driftwood grow short and stunted on the tops of dunes. Caravans
        cross the desert to collect rare reagents. The Archive is often active here,
        seeking the origins of the desert itself and learning the history of this
        long-lost empire.
      </p>
      <h4>The Clockwork Cathedral</h4>
      <p>
        The so-called Clockwork Cathedral is a city recently pulled from the past by
        the Worldbuilders. Its gears and counterweights speak of a time of mechanical
        acumen and grand architectural works.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Worldbuilders have permitted others to access the Cathedral – the Archive
        for historical research, a Diadem family attempting to duplicate its workings,
        a cult of Nova racing them to the same goal, Those Above seeking to harness
        its unique alchemical flow. Now the Worldbuilders seem to regret their
        decision, and each group lobbies that they might be allowed to remain.
      </p>
      <h4>The Colossus</h4>
      <p>
        In the distant past, someone tried to build an Aion in miniature. It was not
        entirely successful... and yet it did not entirely fail, either. A golden
        colossus strides the lands rimward of Diadem, a full koss tall, long and
        steady of gait. Their upturned hands hold towns, and cities have been built
        into their back.
      </p>
      <p>
        The colossus acts as an amplifier for calendrical magic, its steps and
        heartbeat tuned to astrological timescales. This makes it a tempting trophy
        for many civilizations. The Geometers hold it now, but the Unroyal slip in and
        out of their dreams and their allies in the Hearth-kin plan to oust them
        before the next eclipse lets them fortify their wards and solidify their
        power.
      </p>
      <h4>The Garish Sea</h4>
      <p>
        Each wave a different color, the Garish Sea is both stunning and and
        treacherous. Several nations encircle the sea, each with their own name for
        it: the Rainbow Sea, the Prismatic Ocean, the Blinding Waves, the Motley,
        Aion’s Paints.
      </p>
      <p>
        The animals of the Garish Sea provide both rare unconjurable food and potent
        reagents. Diadem plies these waters for travel and fishing, with the Unroyal
        snapping at their heels. Glimmermere seeks ways to preserve the fantastic
        colors for their artwork.
      </p>
      <h4>The Hollow-eyed Towns</h4>
      <p>
        Scholars of the Archive believe that an alien god sleeps in this place,
        perhaps fallen from some other part of the Kaleidoscope. Dreams are filled
        with inhuman language that the True Tongue does not speak. Mirages arise with
        wavering towers that taper like tentacles. Walk toward them and they vanish.
        Conjuration too becomes strange; the local Consensus bears things with no
        discernible purpose, familiar to no one.
      </p>
      <p>
        There are six small city-states here, their people often sunken-eyed from lack
        of restful sleep. Despite the atmosphere, they seem pleased with the way
        things are and do not wish to leave. Newcomers are quite unlikely to stay.
      </p>
      <h4>The Sky-Lands</h4>
      <p>
        Weather in the Basin generally moves Rimward, following the flow. Some clouds
        circle crosswise to this, ever spinward. Those with the eyes of an eagle might
        notice people walking about on those clouds.
      </p>
      <p>
        The term “Sky-Lands” is used for any number of nation states or city states
        that live on solid clouds in the Basin’s sky. They farm strange windblown
        plants, drink water collected as they pass sideways through nimbus and
        stratus, burn their dead and scatter the ashes. The Ægis seeks the secrets of
        these floating fortresses, while the Hearth-kin attempt to educate them and
        the Sovereigns seek fugitive demons hidden here for untold years.
      </p>
      <h4>The Tilting Hills</h4>
      <p>
        Gravity in the Basin points downward.... usually. There are occasionally times
        when this fails to be true, where waterfalls move upward or a mountainside
        feels strangely flat. In the Tilting Hills, gravity skews from time to time,
        and visitors must grab hold of something and fight vertigo lest they fall
        queasily to the ground.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Geometer’s Guild researches the Tilting Hills for their odd measurements.
        Glimmermere visits often for the strange and vertiginous perspective. The
        Worldbuilders are the only people seeking to colonize them. With few people
        barring their way, they have been “restoring” them to flatness with alacrity
        this past century.
      </p>
      <h4 id="underneath">The Underneath</h4>
      <p>
        Not everyone in the Basin lives above it. Some live within, and some live even
        below, in the Underneath. Whole new civilizations wait to be discovered in
        this place, people who have never seen the sun nor the moons. The
        <a href="Cultures.xhtml#groundbreakers">Groundbreakers</a>’ efforts
        and Nova’s explorations have barely begun
        to uncover the secrets of the Basin’s underside.
      </p>
      <p>
        As mentioned above, gravity in the Basin points downward. This is still true
        in the Underneath. The people here are not pulled upward toward the Basin.
        Instead, buildings hang from chains or are carved into mountainous
        stalactites. Water seeps through the stone above. Life here must cling to the
        ceiling or fall thousands of koss to Aion’s inconceivably large, glowing hands
        beneath.
      </p>
      <h4>Windfall</h4>
      <p>
        Windfall is a quiet place at the ends of the world, a pocket of calm between
        roaring ley lines, vacuous Null Zones, and the emptiness beyond the Rim. A
        slow breeze blows always from hubward, carrying the occasional leaf over the
        edge.
      </p>
      <p>
        In this peaceful space a monastery has been built to provide Archivists with a
        place to rest their bodies and minds. A dozen or so live here at any given
        time, not counting the healers and staff who care for them.
      </p>

      <aside title="Nonhumans in the Basin" >
        <h3 id="nonhuman" >Nonhumans in the Basin</h3>

        <p>
          Humanity is by far the dominant intelligent species in the Basin. There are
          communities of other beings, but each one traces its origins back to
          elsewhere in the Kaleidoscope. Likewise, there are communities of human
          beings elsewhere in the Kaleidoscope, and even farther away. There is much
          conjecture that parts of the Kaleidoscope occasionally intersect, that magic
          was common in the past as well, or that the Travel lattice can be accessed
          by accident more easily than one might think.
        </p>
      </aside>
    </section>
    <section class="chapter" title="The Kaleidocope" epub:type="chapter" >
      <h2 id="kaleidoscope" >The Kaleidoscope</h2>
      <p>
        The Great Basin of that the Archive calls home is one world of many. These are
        known as the Kaleidoscope, for their close resemblance to one another.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each world’s reality is similar: there is flow, there is magic, there is the
        Gift, gravity holds one down. Each is different in subtle ways: aspected flow,
        constant winds, new colors. The differences are rarely so great or pervasive
        as to prevent individuals from one world from surviving in another, but there
        are some worlds with poisonous water or choking, sulfurous air.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Kaleidoscope is either very large or perhaps infinite. No end to it has
        ever been found. The Travel Lattice extends into every part of it – or perhaps
        there are worlds beyond the Lattice’s reach that have yet to be found for
        their lack of connection. Thus far the Archive has catalogued over 700 worlds.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Great Basin is held in the hands of the Great God Aion. Other worlds of
        the Kaleidoscope find themselves similarly cradled by one or more
        manifestations of Aion, which look somewhat like the intelligent species of
        that world. On one, Aion is a moth; on another they resemble a bipedal tiger;
        on still another, an elephant. One Basin sits on the back of a great golden
        stingray with a million eyes, for the people who live there are intelligent
        rays. Another thirty-mooned world is held in the belly of a golden-haired
        sloth with the deepest and softest of fur, and lo and behold the people there
        are slothlike in their appearance. Still another is gently supported above the
        heads of three tentacle-faced beings, their wings folding and unfolding in
        mystical patterns. It has no sun. Some Basins are empty of intelligent life,
        and there Aion seems sad for that lack.
      </p>
      <p>
        The arrangement of the worlds in the Kaleidoscope is a matter of much theory
        and little evidence. Are they stacked like a deck of cards? Arranged in a
        constellation or some grand symmetric pattern? No one knows, and there seems
        to be little way to tell.
      </p>
      <h3 id="kaleidoscope_worlds">Worlds of the Kaleidoscope</h3>
      <p>
        The Archive typically names worlds in the Kaleidoscope for their inhabitants
        – the local name nearly always translates to “The Great Basin”, after all.
        Traveling through the myriad of possibilities, one might run across...
      </p>
      <h4>Batoidea</h4>
      <p>
        The Basin of Batoidea is one of the sights recommended to new Archive
        recruits. Nestled on the back of a golden manta ray, it shimmers with deep
        waters and beautiful archipelagos. The people here live more in the shallows,
        though the Gift has empowered them to explore the cold, dark depths as well.
      </p>
      <p>
        Batoidea is well-settled by visitors from other worlds. It seems that cracks
        in the Lattice and wild-magic whirlpools deposit the unlucky here more often
        than on other worlds.
      </p>
      <h4>Corvidae</h4>
      <p>
        The people of Corvidae are the greatcrows. Four meters from beak to tail and
        black of feather, their Basin is held in the talons of an Aion shining and
        clever.
      </p>
      <p>
        The era of wars after the Gift was not kind to the corvids. Their small
        civilizations turned against one another in wars like they had never known.
        Their remaining settlements are small and widely spread. They have little
        trust of one another.
      </p>
      <h4>Cephalopoda</h4>
      <p>
        This is one of many Basins that is primarily sea, with little land. The people
        of Cephalopoda are octopi, with bodies the size of human torsos and long
        tentacles.
      </p>
      <p>
        Until the Gift, the Cephalopods were short-lived, dying not long after
        procreation. The so-called “Interregnum” never happened on this world.
        Instead, the immortality of the Gift allowed them to finally form longer
        bonds. The last 400 years have seen them finally build the sorts of
        civilizations seen on other Basins.
      </p>
      <h4>Lepidoptera</h4>
      <p>
        The people here are moths and butterflies. Their bodies average a meter long,
        with each wing half again as wide. Their colors span every hue in the rainbow
        and many beyond it. Aion beats its wings every seven years, flying through the
        endless void toward a single distant star.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Lepidopterans are homebodies by nature. Travelers are rare. Flowers are
        numerous, and the people had what they needed even before the Gift. They made
        few empires. All this is to say that the age after the Gift was milder here,
        and Lepidopteran historians have a longer memory because of it.
      </p>
      <h4>Loxodonta</h4>
      <p>
        The Loxodons are elephant-folk, smaller but still massive, some
        leather-skinned with great ears, others shaggy with fur to keep out the cold.
        They have always been proud of their wayfaring heritage, and took the Gift as
        an opportunity to begin traveling en masse once again. Their larger
        civilizations have faded away, replaced by smaller and more local tribes.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Basin here is made of wood rather than stone. It is ever-growing,
        naturally renewing, and pieces of it break off the Rim and drift out into the
        void. Some Loxodons have recaptured these to act as vessels of exploration.
      </p>
      <h4>Orichalca</h4>
      <p>
        There are few worlds in the Kaleidoscope whose primary inhabitants are so
        clearly artificial. The Orichalcans are not only made of metal, and not only
        cog-and-springwork automata, but each is also stamped with a serial number and
        a date of manufacture (though in an unknown date system).
      </p>
      <p>
        Whether the Orichalcans were made to resemble Aion in this world, made to
        resemble the inhabitants, or whether they <strong>are</strong> the original
        inhabitants is unknown. No new Orichalcans have been created in such a long
        time that all memories of the old days have been overwritten.
      </p>
      <h4>Rodentia</h4>
      <p>
        Rodentia is a world with multiple intelligent species, unique for their small
        size. Whereas most people in the Kaleidoscope are roughly human-sized, the
        people of Rodentia are sentient mice, rats, and voles of the size that would
        fit in a human hand.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Basin here is likewise tiny compared to the Basin of humanity, but it is
        honeycombed with minuscule tunnels, and the populations are similar. This
        makes flow a carefully rationed resource. Wars are fought over ley line
        placement. Rodientians are perhaps the most likely people to leave their
        Basin, simply for the breathing room.
      </p>
      <h4>Tarsiidae</h4>
      <p>
        Close enough to human to be unsettling, the people of Tarsiidae are
        large-eyed, long-fingered, and possessed of short fur instead of hair. They
        are more dexterous than humans, but physically weaker and slightly smaller.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Basin of Tarsiidae is crisscrossed with ancient tracks. Some ancient
        civilization replaced steel with indestructible cuendillar, but not before the
        world became accustomed to a thin layer of rust. While the wars after the Gift
        damaged some of them, there are still more than enough intact to run a vast
        train network. Several local civilizations are extending that system into the
        Travel Lattice.
      </p>
      <h4>Vulcanae</h4>
      <p>
        The Basin of Vulcanae is one of the most hostile known. The surface is
        perpetually molten, with a few cooler places where it has solidified. The air
        is sulfurous, gas pockets ignite frequently, and tremors are common. The first
        Archive expedition to Vulcanae found their immortality sorely tested.
      </p>
      <p>
        The local people are well-adapted to their world. Though humanoid in form
        (head, torso, two arms, two legs), they are themselves made of molten rock.
        They live on the “shores” of islands with cooler temperatures, and near the
        Rim where the cold void of space provides the same. Their magical studies are
        somewhat impaired by the difficulty of writing in their environment.
      </p>

      <aside title="Do other worlds have tiny humans?">
        <h3 id="tiny_humans">Do other worlds have tiny humans?</h3>

        <p>
          Most of the sentient creatures of the Kaleidoscope can be found in the Great
          Basin, albeit in smaller and non-sapient forms. The greatcrows of Corvidae,
          for example, find the Basin’s “ordinary” crows freakishly fascinating.
          Humanity-analogues can likewise be found in other worlds, typically as a
          knee-high primate with relatively little hair.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <aside title="Aquatic Peoples and Travel" >
        <h3 id="aquatic_travel" >Aquatic Peoples and Travel</h3>
        <p>
          The Travel lattice is not made to be swum.
        </p>
        <p>
          This is problematic for the people of Cephalopoda and Batoidea. Magical
          solutions (such as shapeshifting or spirit-swimming) are made more difficult
          by the fact that the Lattice is a Null Zone. Thus far there has been no safe
          solution.
        </p>
        <p>
          The Vulcanians likewise have difficulty. In their case, it’s because the
          Lattice is so much colder than their native habitat. Bridges to Vulcanae
          occasionally bear a basalt-and-pumice statue, the sad remains of a Vulcanian
          who tried and failed to reach another world.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <aside title="Reaching New Worlds">
        <h3 id="new_worlds">Reaching New Worlds</h3>

        <p>
          Travel through the Lattice is targeted by one’s memories and understandings.
          How, then, does one reach a world one has never seen?
        </p>
        <p>
          In this age of the world, it is most common to be brought by a friend.
          Failing that, one finds an ancient writing (in physical form or in the
          Universal Repositories) with true descriptions of a world upon the
          Kaleidoscope or one of the Worlds Beyond.
        </p>
        <p>
          It is possible to simply invent a place in one’s mind and open a door,
          hoping that the destination exists. This will, more often than not, deposit
          you in a place you vaguely remember – the location that inspired your
          imaginings. For Dream Travel, though, this is the default method.
        </p>
      </aside>

    </section>
    <section class="chapter" title="The Dream Realms" epub:type="chapter" >
      <h2 id="dream_realms" >The Dream Realms</h2>
      <p>
        Within and between the minds of all living beings are the Dream Realms. They
        are invisible but ever-present. Every thought and feeling connects to them,
        every nightmare spawns a new one or rejoins an old one. Without thinking
        beings they shrivel and might even disappear, though naturally it is difficult
        to observe such events. Some Dream Realms are so large that there is always
        someone lost in them, some poor unfortunate soul whose mind and presence
        maintains them.
      </p>
      <p>
        While the Worlds Beyond seem different to each sentient species, two visitors
        to a Dream Realm will agree in every detail on what they saw. This is not to
        say that the Dream Realms are more comprehensible. These places are allegory
        made tangible. They make sense as metaphors, not as real-world places.
      </p>
      <p>
        Because each realm is tied to an emotion or thought, there are often
        signifiers of those things here, drawn from the subconscious of visitors. If
        they associate rage with fire, the Dream Realm of rage will ignite around
        them. If they associate rage with ice, it will chill or freeze. One can learn
        – or reveal – a lot about oneself in the Dream Realms.
      </p>
      <p>
        Dream Realms may seem infinite, but in truth they are simply creating what an
        explorer imagines might be present. Those with the art of
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#Dreamshaping">Dreamshaping</a>
        can control this; others are at the whim of their own subconscious. If
        they secretly expect an edge to the world, they shall find it; if not, they
        may travel forward eternally.
      </p>
      <h3 id="entering_the_dream">Entering the Dream</h3>
      <p>
        Visiting the Dream Realms is done via the art of
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#Dream_Travel">Dream Travel</a>. One
        can travel in physical form, or in a purely mental form also known as astral
        projection.
      </p>
      <p>
        Those who travel physically run the risk of being disoriented by the local
        conditions. They also need to use magic to return themselves to the Basin, and
        can potentially be imprisoned.
      </p>
      <p>
        Those who travel astrally will find themselves changed by the feel of the
        place – less disoriented, more transmuted. They can snap themselves back at
        any time with just a thought, but their bodies lie asleep or comatose in the
        Basin while they travel.
      </p>
      <p>
        Dream Travel and Spirit-walking are akin to one another. Someone
        spirit-walking in astral form can slip in and out of dreams as easily as
        walking to the next room.
      </p>
      <p>
        Regardless of how one arrives, actions in the Dream Realms are taken with
        Communion, Mystery, and Trickery. The more physical Natures have no sway here.
      </p>
      <h3 id="dream_realm_inhabitants">Dream Realm Inhabitants</h3>
      <p>
        There is nothing in the Dream Realms but what its visitors bring with them.
        Every being you see in a Dream Realm is part of your own consciousness, or the
        mind of someone nearby. Killing them does nothing. They may appear again at
        any moment or lie dormant, as appropriate to your own thoughts. Objects and
        places are drawn from memories, often warped or accentuated by emotion.
      </p>
      <p>
        It is rare but possible for figments from a Dream Realm to escape. They take
        the original thought with them. If your longing for someone takes on physical
        form and leaves to pursue them, you will no longer yearn. They are a part of
        you, but they are gone.
      </p>
      <p>
        Many Dream Realms are said to be sentient, but in truth they are merely
        amalgams of their visitors.
      </p>

      <aside title="Dreaming Whilst Dreaming" >
        <h3 id="dreamy_dream" >Dreaming Whilst Dreaming</h3>

        <p>
          It is possible to sleep while in the Dream Realm, and even to dream. One can
          slip from one Dream Realm to another this way. Astral visitors who fall
          asleep instead return to their bodies.
        </p>
        <p>
          It is not possible for a dream traveler in physical form to mentally project
          themselves back to the Basin – only into other Dream Realms. It is because
          of this that the citizens of Glimmermere are particularly cautious when
          visiting the Basin. They are used to walking in mental form from one realm
          to another, but when they visit the Basin they wager their bodies.
        </p>
      </aside>


      <h3 id="dream_realms">A Catalog of Dreams</h3>
      <p>A small sampling of Dream Realms can be found below.</p>
      <h4>Aion's Shadow</h4>
      <p>
        The feeling that one is not at home in one’s own house, that one’s family is
        not who they seem. Aion’s Shadow is a dark mirror that touches our own world
        and replicates it in ill-remembered detail. This realm is used for Spirit
        Walking by certain Traditions.
      </p>
      <h4>Berit'tuni</h4>
      <p>
        The obsession with number and arrangement. Here all things are discrete and
        separable. Stones rise faceted from the ground. Shapes with impossible angles
        fall from the sky and one cannot help but count them.
      </p>
      <h4>Fiasha An</h4>
      <p>
        Unrequited longing. The moon hangs forever in the sky. The land is positively
        littered with scenic overlooks and lone trees under which to sigh over loves
        that cannot be. Soft shapes move silently and peacefully in the mist.
      </p>
      <h4>Inwolath</h4>
      <p>
        The joy of swimming. Inwolath transforms all who enter it into fishlike forms
        so they can swim in its currents and rest in its waters.
      </p>
      <h4>Khai'Gholam</h4>
      <p>
        The nightmare from which dreamers cannot wake. It is the terrifying dream that
        clutches one and strikes over and over, unending. Those who visit in astral
        form leave their bodies shaking and sweating.
      </p>
      <h4>Nunto Karak</h4>
      <p>
        A broken realm of dreams interrupted. Waves of nonexistence sweep the world,
        sweeping away structures and inhabitants. Only visitors remain unchanged when
        they pass.
      </p>
      <h4>Qli-thak-kos</h4>
      <p>
        A cycle of thought, in which all tends towards its opposite until roles and
        hearts are reversed, and then flows back. One must use caution when deciding
        when to leave.
      </p>
      <h4>Sunset-Over-Sea</h4>
      <p>
        The peace of a rose-tinted sky. This is where Glimmermere went when its
        residents left the Basin. Many still live here now, and while they protect
        themselves from the realm’s emotional effects, it does provide a beautiful and
        quiet refuge for students of the arts.
      </p>
      <h4>Ushendi-loves-Bendar</h4>
      <p>
        The drive of affection and new-formed attraction. Crushes and infatuations
        find ways to make themselves known here. This is a realm to make young lovers
        blush.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section class="chapter" title="The Worlds Beyond" epub:type="chapter" >
      <h2 id="worlds_beyond" >The Worlds Beyond</h2>
      <p>
        The Worlds Beyond are places outside of the Kaleidoscope. They have a reality
        and permanence that the Dream Realms lack. A Dream Realm with no visitors
        withers and disappears; the Worlds Beyond persist.
      </p>
      <p>
        This is because of the source of these worlds. Whereas the Dream Realms
        reflect the thoughts and emotions of living beings, the Worlds Beyond are part
        of the mind of Aion. Each world expresses a process or complex within Aion's
        mind. In many ways, the Worlds Beyond <strong>are</strong> Aion's mind, too
        vast to be contained by its body.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most of Aion's mental processes seem to map well to the human mind. Some do
        not. Sometimes one can easily tell what the concept is, as with the literally
        fiery passion of the Brass Inferno or the paranoid Net of Response. Other
        times it's not as clear.
      </p>
      <p>
        If one thing is clear from the resonance between these worlds and Aion’s self,
        it is that Aion’s mind is not perfect. Psychologically speaking, Aion may not
        even be mentally well. As much as Aion has self-love, there are heavens. As
        much as Aion has self-hating thoughts, there are hells.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each of the Worlds Beyond are centered around one or more supernaturally
        powerful beings. These gods are always strongly linked to the thoughts of the
        realm. They have no choice but to express them in one way or another.
      </p>
      <p>
        These gods created (and sometimes still create) the other inhabitants of their
        respective worlds, collectively referred to as outlanders. Each is a hybrid
        between the realm’s core thought and other concepts. Their societies portray
        certain structures-of-mind within Aion. Outlanders are beings of constrained
        volition, unable to step beyond their roles, like actors in a perpetual play.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each World Beyond revolves around the relationship between creators and the
        created. Some gods bring outlanders into being to worship them, or to seek
        their favor. Others generate outlanders to build endless structures, or to
        explore existence and report back. The interactions between gods, outsiders,
        and souls from the Kaleidoscope says volumes about the state of mind of the
        local god.
      </p>
      <p>
        Speaking of souls: the Worlds Beyond are also afterlives. If the
        <a href="Magic.xhtml#uncountable_spinners">Uncountable
        Spinners of Silver Cord</a> did not exist, then souls from the Basin
        would go immediately to the Worlds Beyond, and eventually leave them to
        reincarnate, free from the memories of their past lives and their post-death
        experiences. The Spinners, broken as they are, change this. Some souls
        reincarnate immediately. Some stay in the Basin for much longer than others.
        Some remember pieces of their pasts.
      </p>
      <p>
        Which afterlife one arrives in is not reliably predictable. Most people go to
        afterlives their people knew from times long past. Many people are judged by
        the standards of their cultures. None of this is absolute. The process is
        broken.
      </p>
      <p>
        The Worlds Beyond sometimes touch the Basin, but more often must be reached
        via Travel. Each of the Worlds Beyond has one and only one place that connects
        to the Travel Lattice. Sometimes there might seem to be multiple gateways to
        different “realms” in a single world. In truth, these are places where
        multiple worlds have been stitched together so that natives, visitors, and
        perhaps the souls of the departed could walk between them.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each person sees the Worlds Beyond through their own lens. Local idioms are
        translated into personal understandings. When human beings visit the Worlds
        Beyond, the gods and their servants seem humanoid (though other visitors
        retain their own appearance). When creatures from elsewhere in the
        Kaleidoscope visit, they fit the form of those visitors instead. The Sixth
        Sense can reveal these forms as false, if one thinks to check, but not
        everyone does. This makes tomes found in the Universal Repositories
        untrustworthy. If a ruler is described as a titanic varicolored snail, check
        to see whether the author was Muricodean.
      </p>

      <aside title="The Gift in the Worlds of the Gods">
        <h3 id="gods_gift">The Gift in the Worlds of the Gods</h3>

        <p>
          Kaleidoscope natives who were in the Worlds Beyond at the time of the Gift
          did not receive the capability for magic. Only the portion that broke
          magical bonds was passed to them. It is not known why. Some worlds still
          have enclaves of humans who know nothing of the Gift, the local gods being
          too possessive or mindless to tell them.
        </p>
        <p>
          As fragments of Aion’s mind, the gods of the Worlds Beyond are not eligible
          for the Gift. They did not receive it; they cannot be given it.
        </p>
        <p>
          Unlike the gods, however, outlanders are hybridized with other ideas.
          Whether one considers these creatures less conceptually pure or more human,
          they are nevertheless distant enough from Aion that they could receive the
          Gift. This would provide them with free will and allow them to decide
          whether to stay in their world or move beyond it.
        </p>
        <p>
          This last fact not common knowledge. Convincing outlanders to leave their
          roles for long enough to complete the required ritual is difficult.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <h3 id="sample_worlds_beyond">A Register of the Beyond</h3>
      <p>
        Here is a small sampling of the Worlds Beyond. Some of these entries are
        categories; others are specific locales.
      </p>
      <h4>Elemental Planes and their kin</h4>
      <p>
        The five Elemental Planes are infinite expanses of infinite variations on the
        components of the world. Each is ruled in its own way: the Maelstrom Conquerer
        of Water, the Void Council, the All-Consumption group-mind that rules Fire.
        Traditions whose Fount is Elementalism often draw their power directly from
        these worlds.
      </p>
      <p>
        Around these planes lie dozens more worlds touched by those elements. From the
        sky-realms full of airships to a dark underground of lava and dwarves, each
        reflects its own blend of take on the elements. Many shade into emotional
        resonances as well – the Brass Inferno is a sensual realm where arousal
        generates literal heat. Others were connected to or created by a particular
        Kaleidoscopic world. The Grand Chasm, for example, might once have been like
        the Plane of Earth, save that an entire civilization mined it for a billion
        years and then left only their dwellings behind.
      </p>
      <h4>The Forever City</h4>
      <p>
        This multifaceted metropolis was once linked via Travel to a thousand
        destinations across a thousand worlds. Then whatever supplied its flow ran
        out. Now the doors here only work sporadically, and the city is full of
        fugitives and squatters. The city-gods are still strong in this place, and
        their outlanders sustain the workings of the city to keep the place’s
        remaining flow feeding its pantheon.
      </p>
      <h4>Heavens</h4>
      <p>
        Places of peaceful rest and recuperation. The best-known heaven is the
        once-vacant heaven that now serves as the headquarters of the Golden Ægis. It
        is a sky-realm of granite floors and marble pillars, empty tables and lonely
        thrones.
      </p>
      <p>
        Not all heavens are vacant. Most, in fact, are inhabited by gods and angels,
        with varying amounts of interest in the Kaleidocope and matters there. While
        their involvement with the outside world varies, the common thread is
        compassion. Heavenly pantheons seek to help others, especially the souls that
        have come to them from the Kaleidoscope.
      </p>
      <h4>Hells</h4>
      <p>
        As there are many heavens, so are there many hells. The one intertwined with
        the Sovereigns of Hell is perhaps the most famous, but many of the Basin’s
        peoples have stories of souls treated harshly in the “next world”.
      </p>
      <p>
        Each hell is uniquely different. Some burn, others freeze, still others
        overwhelm with gore until no shock remains. Some have tortures tailored to the
        individual, some do not. Some resemble heavens until the awful moment of
        revelation comes.
      </p>
      <p>
        If the thing that unites all heavens is compassion, the common factor for all
        hells is torment – and that they are notoriously difficult to escape.
      </p>
      <h4>The Museum Labyrinth</h4>
      <p>
        Worlds such as this one appear to be Aion’s memory. Here, artwork showcasing
        previous ages of the world are kept in a museum with glass walls. The god here
        is eager to show what has happened, though it rarely focuses on important
        events, preferring those about which it remembers unending detail.
      </p>
      <p>
        Escape from the Museum Labyrinth is difficult. There are dozens of explorers
        still wandering its halls, seeking, seeking... something...
      </p>
      <h4>The Fool's Scriptorium</h4>
      <p>
        Not all of the Worlds Beyond are vast. This one is tiny, composed of a single
        shed-sized room. Every space is filled with scrolls, and every scroll is
        filled with nonsense. The god of this place laughs eternally.
      </p>
      <h4>The Net of Response</h4>
      <p>
        The Net’s inhabitants maintain a spy network stretching across large portions
        of the Worlds Beyond. This is because the god of this place desires to
        <strong>know</strong>. It must apprehend all things, and then it must decide
        on the proper response to them, quickly. The faster this happens, the calmer
        the realm. When information is slow to come, the god becomes agitated, and its
        servitors rush from place to place – often ineffectually.
      </p>
      <p>
        Deciding on a response doesn’t mean acting on it. The decision only need be
        made, not executed. Then records can be made, and the world can move on to the
        next point of data.
      </p>

    </section>
    <section class="chapter" title="Stranger Places" epub:type="chapter" >
      <h2 id="stranger_places" >Stranger Places</h2>
      <p>
        There are places that do not fit easily into the cosmology described above.
        Many of these show signs of having been artificially created, remnants of some
        past civilization’s long-lost magical works.
      </p>
      <h3 id="travel_lattice">The Travel Lattice</h3>
      <p>
        The art of <a href="Magic.xhtml#Travel">Travel</a>
        opens giant doors into an airy void full of
        bridges. Every bridge is exactly five koss from end to end. Their width
        varies, but they are generally wide enough for at least two wagons to pass.
        Some of them have ornately carved railings; others are bare spans of marble.
      </p>
      <p>
        They pass in all directions, up and down, left and right, sometimes one
        back-to-back with another. One can see no sky or ground, only an endless
        random mesh. It is difficult to determine much else about this world but that
        it is filled with bridges. They are not indestructible, but they are quite
        hardy, and damage seems to be repaired when no one is looking.
      </p>
      <p>
        While it is not unheard-of for fellow travelers to pass within sight of one
        another in the Lattice, it is uncommon. The void is vast, and the number of
        bridges inconceivably large. If the Kaleidoscope is infinite, the Travel
        Lattice is even more so.
      </p>
      <h3 id="red_space">The Red Space</h3>
      <p>
        The Travel Lattice has some unfortunate properties. It doesn’t generate flow,
        you can’t grow food there, its local Canon of Form is nothing but bridges.
        Some people live there, but it’s not a wonderful existence.
      </p>
      <p>Next to the Red Space, however, it is positively welcoming.</p>
      <p>
        The Red Space seems actively hostile to living beings. It generates no flow of
        its own. Any that is produced, such as inside an unlucky visitor, simply falls
        away and disappears as if swirling down a drain. It is grating to every sense:
        a penetrating red glow from all about, a buzzing sound that one can never get
        used to, a smell universally disliked, even a gritty texture on the fingers
        and tongue. One can find no rest in sleep. The ground grows nothing, the sky
        has no clouds.
      </p>
      <p>
        Despite all this, the Red Space preserves nonliving matter well. The passage
        of time does not ravage anything within, at least, not physically. Food stored
        here will not rot, books will not molder. Its vastness, at a scale of over
        sixty thousand to one with the Kaleidoscope, provides virtually unlimited
        space.
      </p>
      <p>
        Horror stories are told of people wandering the Red Space, driven slowly
        insane by the light and isolation, hungry for the slightest dribble of flow
        and the possibility of returning home. The Soulpact has as one of its goals
        the rescue of all Red Space exiles, but as of yet they have no good way to
        locate them.
      </p>
      <h3 id="demiplanes">Local Demiplanes</h3>
      <p>
        There are many smaller worlds attached to the Kaleidoscope in various places.
        Some ancient peoples built soul repositories with their own tiny afterlives.
        Others carved out vacation spots or hideaways. The GM is encouraged to create
        small worlds as desired, or as the rich and powerful would have desired, to
        fit their needs.
      </p>

    </section>
    <section class="chapter" title="Hazards" epub:type="chapter" >
      <h2 id="hazards" >Hazards</h2>
      <p>
        The Great Basin can be a dangerous place, even for magi. The danger is further
        compounded when they explore beyond its borders. This section covers some of
        the natural and magical threats that can be found in various parts of the
        Basin and other worlds.
      </p>
      <h3 id="static_hazards">Static Hazards</h3>
      <p>
        These include environmental conditions, flow abnormalities, traps, and
        automated defenses. They are typically handled using the
        <a href="Rules.xhtml#basic">Four Questions</a>,
        with the following Natures and Professions relevant:
      </p>
      <p>
        Rockslides, volcanoes, other immediate disasters: Industry or Self 2, and the
        Samaritan profession
      </p>
      <p>
        Storms, cold/heat, physical conditions of Warped Flow Industry or Self 2,
        Explorer/Healer
      </p>
      <p>
        Warped Flow conditions, emotional or moral: Communion or Self 2,
        Clergy/Courtesan/Politician/Prolocutor
      </p>
      <p>
        Warped Flow conditions, perceptional or intellectual: Mystery or Communion 2,
        Artist/Medium/Scholar/Spy
      </p>
      <p>Traps: War 2 or Self 4, Soldier/Spy/Theurge</p>
      <p>Automated defenses: War or Trickery 3+, Soldier/Spy/Theurge</p>
      <p>
        Static hazards are a fact of life for some parts of the Basin, but they’re
        rarely a major part of the story. You overcome them or you figure out a way
        around them, and you move on. All the real dangers in the Basin are alive.
      </p>
      <h3 id="living_hazards">Living Hazards</h3>
      <p>
        Dangers posed by living beings are handled using the
        <a href="Rules.xhtml#conflict">Conflict system</a>,
        but with a limited set of game stats.
      </p>
      <p>
        Some of these creatures have a conflict timescale listed that’s different from
        the usual “a few seconds”. It’s tough to fight an entire plague of locusts at
        once, or to punch out a koss-long serpent with a fist just a few inches wide.
        If you need to settle things more quickly, treat this like a Project in terms
        of spending Reserve to speed things up.
      </p>
      <p>
        All living hazards should be assumed to have a Core Value of 4 in their
        central areas of competence, and 0-1 elsewhere. These “virtual” CV ratings
        represent instinct rather than morality. All the creatures on this list are
        non-sapient. While some are clever, none of them can hold a conversation with
        you. As soon as you’re dealing with something you can talk with, it should get
        a full character writeup.
      </p>

      <aside title="Challenged to a Dance-Off" >
        <h3 id="danceoff" >Challenged to a Dance-Off</h3>

        <p>
          In the unlikely event that you force one of the creatures in this section
          into a different sort of conflict than its Professions would cover, any
          nonexistent Natures are 1 and Professions are 0. The creature retains its
          Core Values, including the usual Self-Preservation 4.
        </p>
        <p>Getting these creatures out of their comfort zone is pretty hard to do.
          Attempting to debate The Blue City’s End or challenge The Ones With All The
          Teeth to a riddle contest will probably end with them just trying to kill
          you.
        </p>
      </aside>

      <p>Giant Beasts</p>
      <p>
        <strong>Ivory Thunder</strong> is an elephant the size of a hill. She is an
        example of a Gargantua. Gargantua are a rare but “natural” phenomenon (in as
        much as “natural” has meaning in a magical world) wherein otherwise ordinary
        creatures grow without limit throughout a lengthened lifespan. She acts very
        much like an ordinary elephant – she travels with a herd of (much smaller)
        elephants, and she is fairly smart for an animal. Gargantua eat more than an
        ordinary animal, but not as much as one might imagine.
      </p>
      <p>Natures: Self 4, War 3</p>
      <p>Professions: Battle 3, Shelter Others 2, Weather the Elements 4</p>
      <p>Infrastructure I</p>
      <p>Conflict timescale: 10 minutes</p>
      <p>
        <strong>Rimward Current</strong> is a koss-long whale-serpent that lives half
        in our world, half in a state of perpetual spirit-walking. Its species,
        scattered throughout the Kaleidoscope, are very curious but not intelligent
        enough to communicate beyond basic concepts. Rimward Current is mostly a
        danger to aquatic construction projects that are sizeable enough to draw its
        attention.
      </p>
      <p>Natures: Mystery 3, Self 4, War 3</p>
      <p>
        Professions: Disappear into water 4, Eat 3, Investigate 2, Shrug it off 5
      </p>
      <p>Infrastructure II</p>
      <p>Conflict timescale: 30 minutes</p>
      <p>Hordes</p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Blue City's End</strong> is the name for a horde of billions of
        self-replicating tin locusts. The Blue City was a haven for magi a thousand
        years ago, until everything went wrong. Its strange periwinkle building
        materials repaired it. Its placement in the mountains far from any ley lines
        sheltered it. The Blue City Alchemists were well-known among magical circles,
        and they gathered mountains of books and scrolls in their libraries. The
        city's defenses were a bit sparse, and one of the magi was worried. They built
        a half-dozen tin automata, tiny but fierce, and gave them the power to
        reproduce like living beings. They destroyed everything.
      </p>
      <p>Natures: Self 2, Trickery 3, War 4</p>
      <p>Professions: Overwhelm 3, Hide 3</p>
      <p>Infrastructure I</p>
      <p>Conflict timescale: 10 minutes</p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Timeless Burrowers</strong> are massive psychic worms linked in
        horrible dreams. They live many koss beneath the surface. They are forever
        asleep, but speak to one another in dreams. Sometimes they feel the tug of the
        living above them, and their minds rise to scratch the flea that has bothered
        them off the Basin's back. The Burrowers may be from another world in the
        Kaleidoscope, or perhaps the Great Basin hosts more than one intelligent
        species, but they live on such a timescale that communication is all but
        impossible. Words take years, sentences take centuries. Strike against them,
        though, and they will flail at you until you are crushed in mind and body.
      </p>
      <p>Natures: Communion 4, Self 4, War 5</p>
      <p>Professions: Burrow 5, Devour 4, Nightmares 5</p>
      <p>Infrastructure II</p>
      <p>
        Conflict timescale: 1 week, mostly because of the difficulty in actually
        reaching them.
      </p>
      <p>Flow Parasites</p>
      <p>
        Flow Parasites eat magic. They’re the exception to the rule that you can’t
        steal someone else’s flow or flat-out prevent someone from casting spells.
        When running conflicts with Flow Parasites, it’s ok to apply Complications
        that interfere with spellcasting ability, but only in the specific ways listed
        below (“Flow Complications”). These are generally resisted with Self.
      </p>
      <p>
        Most Flow Parasites are roughly human-sized. They’re vaguely human-shaped, or
        perhaps bear-shaped, or like some kind of poorly made half-eaten scarecrow.
        They are all fractals of dimension from 2-4, somewhere between “flat” and “all
        too solid”.
      </p>
      <p>
        <strong>The Ones With All The Teeth:</strong> In their mouth, down their
        throat, on their hands, on their faces. The Ones With All The Teeth are
        unsubtle holes in the world with gleaming white edges of enamel. They live
        along ley lines in remote locations where they have not yet been driven out,
        but would much rather eat something with more variety. They drag their prey
        back to hiding places, stashing them together so that when one’s flow is
        stagnant they can suckle from another. Their victims are usually found in
        shreds, slowly attempting to regenerate.
      </p>
      <p>Natures: Self 5, War 5</p>
      <p>Professions: Eat Your Magic 5, Slaughter 4</p>
      <p>Conflict timescale: normal</p>
      <p>Flow Complications:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Trivial: A painless tickling sensation</li>
        <li>Minor: A few minor cuts that leak flow</li>
        <li>
          Moderate: All the flow of one Nature leaks out of you through a nasty wound.
          You can’t access it until the wound heals substantially.
        </li>
        <li>
          Major: As Moderate, except for it’s either War, Self, and Industry or
          Communion, Mystery, and Trickery that you’re locked out of.
        </li>
        <li>
          Critical: Incapacitated by the pain as a torrent of flow is ripped from your
          corpus.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>The Ones That Follow You Home</strong> slide invisibly into shadows.
        They only take magic from those who are alone. They'd prefer to leave their
        victims unaware that anything even happened, so they'll try to steal it while
        you sleep. They'll come back night after night if they can. Victims typically
        lose Mystery first, to become less aware, then Communion, so they can't call
        for help, then War so they can't fight back. Put up a fight and they're much
        more likely to leave than fight back. Once they’re in, though, they live in
        your shadow and draw bits of magic like a tick draws blood.
      </p>
      <p>Natures: Self 3, Trickery 5</p>
      <p>Professions: Ambush 3, Hide 3, Steal Your Magic 4</p>
      <p>Conflict timescale: normal</p>
      <p>Flow Complications:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Trivial: A chill</li>
        <li>Minor: Out of breath</li>
        <li>
          Moderate: Take -1 to Mystery, Communion, or War (cumulative as long as it’s
          attached)
        </li>
        <li>
          Major: You’re inclined to explain away anything else it does. Treat future
          conflicts as Subtle automatically, with no penalty.
        </li>
        <li>
          Critical: It’s permanently attached to your shadow, as if you were always in
          a -2 Null Zone.
        </li>
      </ul>
      <p>
        <strong>The Ones Without Eyes</strong> take sensory magics first. They’re
        among the weaker flow parasites, which is fortunate: they exist in large
        numbers in the deep wilderness. They are able to find food easily. Taking a
        bull’s sense of smell or a bird’s proprioception will feed them for days.
        Before they breed, they feast, taking a every sense from as many animals as
        they can find and spawning hundreds of eggs like holes where someone has
        erased the world. Few of them make it to adulthood as they steal each others’
        senses and leave their broodmates to starve helplessly to death.
      </p>
      <p>Natures: Self 3, Trickery 3</p>
      <p>Professions: Stalk 3, Steal Your Senses 3</p>
      <p>Conflict timescale: normal</p>
      <p>Flow Complications:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Trivial: That wasn’t you blinking. This isn’t tinnitus.</li>
        <li>
          Minor: You can’t smell or taste anything. You become dizzy or lose track of
          time.
        </li>
        <li>
          Moderate: Your sense of hearing or touch is gone. You lose arts like
          Psychometry.
        </li>
        <li>Major: You’re blind. You lose your sixth sense and Farspeech.</li>
        <li>
          Critical: You are entirely without sensory input and cannot interact with
          the outside world. Even Rapport is denied to you.
        </li>
      </ul>

    </section>


    <aside title="Personhood" id="personhood">
      <h3>Personhood</h3>

      <p>
        We’ve tried to make it clear, but it bears repeating: There are no
        “intelligent monsters” in this game. There are mindless monsters, and there
        are sapient beings capable of choosing their actions. If you can converse
        with it, that’s not a monster, that’s a person.
      </p>
    </aside>
  </section>
</body>

</html>
